I can see Douglas there before the fire, to which he had got up to present his
back, looking down at his interlocutor with his hands in his pockets.







Grose, since then, in the way of manners and things, had done as she could for
Flora; and there were, further, a cook, a housemaid, a dairywoman, an old pony,
an old groom, and an old gardener, all likewise thoroughly respectable.







So far had Douglas presented his picture when someone put a question.







At this, with one of the quick turns of simple folk, she suddenly flamed up.







I turned and saw that Flora, whom, ten minutes before, I had established in the
schoolroom with a sheet of white paper, a pencil, and a copy of nice
“round O’s,” now presented herself to view at the open door.







She stared, taking my meaning in; but it produced in her an odd laugh.







This, at all events, was for the time: a time so full that, as I recall the way
it went, it reminds me of all the art I now need to make it a little distinct.







I so like it as through feeling that I could throw myself into it in trouble.







There was one direction, assuredly, in which these discoveries stopped: deep
obscurity continued to cover the region of the boy’s conduct at school.







I forbore, for the moment, to analyze this description further than by the
reflection that a part of it applied to several of the members of the
household, of the half-dozen maids and men who were still of our small colony.







I faltered.







Proofs, I say, yes—from the moment I really took hold.







I should so have steadied myself as to be able to make up my mind what to do.







This drew from me, in the state of my nerves, a flash of impatience.







It was as if now in my friend’s own eyes Miss Jessel had again appeared.







Miles himself.







Lord’s mercy that if they were ruined the pieces would still serve.







At the hour I now speak of she had joined me, under pressure, on the terrace,
where, with the lapse of the season, the afternoon sun was now agreeable; and
we sat there together while, before us, at a distance, but within call if we
wished, the children strolled to and fro in one of their most manageable moods.







Then, after another embrace, the incident and our interview closed on my
recognition of all the reserves of goodness that, for his joke, he had been
able to draw upon.







Standing there before me while I kept my seat, she visibly turned things over.







She had been scanning the distance, but she now dropped on me a foolish face.







I quickly rose, and I think I must have shown her a queerer face than ever yet.







There was, alas, a difficulty about that: I would have thanked him with all my
soul had I not had in a proportionate measure this conviction of the secret of
my pupils.







Transcribed here the speech sounds harmless enough, particularly as uttered in
the sweet, high, casual pipe with which, at all interlocutors, but above all at
his eternal governess, he threw off intonations as if he were tossing roses.







I felt that I might, perhaps, after all, succeed in keeping my wits about me.







It was this, of a truth, that made her, as she filled out my picture, gape.







Something in his tone and the expression of his face, as I got this from him,
set my heart aching with such a pang as it had never yet known; so unutterably
touching was it to see his little brain puzzled and his little resources taxed
to play, under the spell laid on him, a part of innocence and consistency.







I felt that I didn’t know so well as Miles, and I took temporary refuge.







Again, at this, with his sweet ironic face, he made a movement on the pillow.







He looked round at me now, as if in recognition of my understanding him; then
ever so gently, “To let me alone,” he replied.







My companion stared at the vacant mooring place and then again across the lake.







There was something in the small valor of it that quite finished me: these
three words from her were, in a flash like the glitter of a drawn blade, the
jostle of the cup that my hand, for weeks and weeks, had held high and full to
the brim that now, even before speaking, I felt overflow in a deluge.







She rose erect on the spot my friend and I had lately quitted, and there was
not, in all the long reach of her desire, an inch of her evil that fell short.







My friend appeared on this ground more reluctant than I could quite understand.







I had seen her do before, gave way to all the grief of it.







I couldn’t have desired more emphasis, but I just hesitated.







They proved to be so indeed, but she could still blush, almost, to show it.







I turned it over—I tried to be more judicial.







He had really a manner of his own, and I could only try to keep up with him.







To those <i>they</i> liked,” he added.







There was, somehow, less of it than I had expected; but I turned it over.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.