      PREFACE.







      A few years ago, while visiting or, rather, rummaging about Notre-Dame,
      the author of this book found, in an obscure nook of one of the towers,
      the following word, engraved by hand upon the wall:—
    </p>
<p class="center">
       ἈΝÁΓΚΗ.







      These Greek capitals, black with age, and quite deeply graven in the
      stone, with I know not what signs peculiar to Gothic caligraphy imprinted
      upon their forms and upon their attitudes, as though with the purpose of
      revealing that it had been a hand of the Middle Ages which had inscribed
      them there, and especially the fatal and melancholy meaning contained in
      them, struck the author deeply.







      He questioned himself; he sought to divine who could have been that soul
      in torment which had not been willing to quit this world without leaving
      this stigma of crime or unhappiness upon the brow of the ancient church.







      It is upon this word that this book is founded.







      March, 1831.







      VOLUME I.







      BOOK FIRST.







      Three hundred and forty-eight years, six months, and nineteen days ago
      to-day, the Parisians awoke to the sound of all the bells in the triple
      circuit of the city, the university, and the town ringing a full peal.







      What put the “whole population of Paris in commotion,” as Jehan de Troyes
      expresses it, on the sixth of January, was the double solemnity, united
      from time immemorial, of the Epiphany and the Feast of Fools.







      So the crowd of citizens, male and female, having closed their houses and
      shops, thronged from every direction, at early morn, towards some one of
      the three spots designated.







      Justice (the courts of law), which was well roofed and walled; and that
      the curious left the poor, scantily flowered maypole to shiver all alone
      beneath the sky of January, in the cemetery of the Chapel of Braque.







      The populace thronged the avenues of the law courts in particular, because
      they knew that the Flemish ambassadors, who had arrived two days
      previously, intended to be present at the representation of the mystery,
      and at the election of the Pope of the Fools, which was also to take place
      in the grand hall.







      This was produced by the buffet of an archer, or the horse of one of the
      provost’s sergeants, which kicked to restore order; an admirable
      tradition which the provostship has bequeathed to the constablery, the
      constablery to the <i>maréchaussée</i>, the <i>maréchaussée</i> to our
      <i>gendarmeri</i> of Paris.







      Thousands of good, calm, <i>bourgeois</i> faces thronged the windows, the doors,
      the dormer windows, the roofs, gazing at the palace, gazing at the
      populace, and asking nothing more; for many Parisians content themselves
      with the spectacle of the spectators, and a wall behind which something is
      going on becomes at once, for us, a very curious thing indeed.







      If it could be granted to us, the men of 1830, to mingle in thought with
      those Parisians of the fifteenth century, and to enter with them, jostled,
      elbowed, pulled about, into that immense hall of the palace, which was so
      cramped on that sixth of January, 1482, the spectacle would not be devoid
      of either interest or charm, and we should have about us only things that
      were so old that they would seem new.







      With the reader’s consent, we will endeavor to retrace in thought, the
      impression which he would have experienced in company with us on crossing
      the threshold of that grand hall, in the midst of that tumultuous crowd in
      surcoats, short, sleeveless jackets, and doublets.







      Let the reader picture to himself now, this immense, oblong hall,
      illuminated by the pallid light of a January day, invaded by a motley and
      noisy throng which drifts along the walls, and eddies round the seven
      pillars, and he will have a confused idea of the whole effect of the
      picture, whose curious details we shall make an effort to indicate with
      more precision.







      Patru.







      In the middle of the hall, opposite the great door, a platform of gold
      brocade, placed against the wall, a special entrance to which had been
      effected through a window in the corridor of the gold chamber, had been
      erected for the Flemish emissaries and the other great personages invited
      to the presentation of the mystery play.







      It was upon the marble table that the mystery was to be enacted, as usual.







      Four of the bailiff of the palace’s sergeants, perfunctory guardians of
      all the pleasures of the people, on days of festival as well as on days of
      execution, stood at the four corners of the marble table.







      Cardinal de Bourbon, the bailiff of the courts, Madame Marguerite of
      Austria, the sergeants with their rods, the cold, the heat, the bad
      weather, the Bishop of Paris, the Pope of the Fools, the pillars, the
      statues, that closed door, that open window; all to the vast amusement of
      a band of scholars and lackeys scattered through the mass, who mingled
      with all this discontent their teasing remarks, and their malicious
      suggestions, and pricked the general bad temper with a pin, so to speak.







      Among the rest there was a group of those merry imps, who, after smashing
      the glass in a window, had seated themselves hardily on the entablature,
      and from that point despatched their gaze and their railleries both within
      and without, upon the throng in the hall, and the throng upon the Place.







      It was easy to see, from their parodied gestures, their ringing laughter,
      the bantering appeals which they exchanged with their comrades, from one
      end of the hall to the other, that these young clerks did not share the
      weariness and fatigue of the rest of the spectators, and that they
      understood very well the art of extracting, for their own private
      diversion from that which they had under their eyes, a spectacle which
      made them await the other with patience.







      A shout of laughter from all the students greeted the unlucky name of the
      poor furrier of the king’s robes.







      At length one of these, as fat, short, and venerable as himself, came to
      his rescue.







      The whole band burst into laughter.







      Master Andry raised his eyes, seemed to measure in an instant the height
      of the pillar, the weight of the scamp, mentally multiplied that weight by
      the square of the velocity and remained silent.







      Each rivalled his neighbor in his haste to turn towards the Place.







      The entire band repeated this quip in a voice of thunder, clapping their
      hands furiously.







      Then came the turns of the other dignitaries.







      Meanwhile, the sworn bookseller of the university, Master Andry Musnier,
      was inclining his ear to the furrier of the king’s robes, Master Gilles
      Lecornu.







      At this moment, midday sounded.







      On this occasion, it was too much.







      The crowd clapped their hands.







      It was a critical moment.







      At that moment, the tapestry of the dressing-room, which we have described
      above, was raised, and afforded passage to a personage, the mere sight of
      whom suddenly stopped the crowd, and changed its wrath into curiosity as
      by enchantment.







      The personage, but little reassured, and trembling in every limb, advanced
      to the edge of the marble table with a vast amount of bows, which, in
      proportion as he drew nearer, more and more resembled genuflections.







      Breton archer from the guard of Monsieur de Berry.







      Nevertheless, as be harangued them, the satisfaction and admiration
      unanimously excited by his costume were dissipated by his words; and when
      he reached that untoward conclusion: “As soon as his illustrious eminence,
      the cardinal, arrives, we will begin,” his voice was drowned in a thunder
      of hooting.







      Poussepain and the other clerks perched in the window.







      Hung by the populace for waiting, hung by the cardinal for not having
      waited, he saw between the two dilemmas only an abyss; that is to say, a
      gallows.







      Luckily, some one came to rescue him from his embarrassment, and assume
      the responsibility.







      The other did not hear.







      Jupiter breathed once more.







      The hand clapping was deafening, and Jupiter had already withdrawn under
      his tapestry, while the hall still trembled with acclamations.







      In the meanwhile, the personage who had so magically turned the tempest
      into dead calm, as our old and dear Corneille puts it, had modestly
      retreated to the half-shadow of his pillar, and would, no doubt, have
      remained invisible there, motionless, and mute as before, had he not been
      plucked by the sleeve by two young women, who, standing in the front row
      of the spectators, had noticed his colloquy with Michel Giborne-Jupiter.







      The stranger approached the railing.







      The tall, light-haired young man retreated a step; but the two curious
      maidens had no mind to let slip their prize.







      A brief silence ensued—broken by the stranger.







      The author of the “Cid” could not have said “Pierre Corneille” with more
      pride.







      However, scholar Johannes had not fallen asleep.







      This was all that was needed.







      The music of high and low instruments immediately became audible from the
      interior of the stage; the tapestry was raised; four personages, in motley
      attire and painted faces, emerged from it, climbed the steep ladder of the
      theatre, and, arrived upon the upper platform, arranged themselves in a
      line before the public, whom they saluted with profound reverences; then
      the symphony ceased.







      The mystery was about to begin.







      All this was, in fact, very fine.







      It pains us to say it, but this first ecstasy was speedily disturbed.







      Hardly had Gringoire raised this intoxicating cup of joy and triumph to
      his lips, when a drop of bitterness was mingled with it.







      This episode considerably distracted the attention of the audience; and a
      goodly number of spectators, among them Robin Poussepain, and all the
      clerks at their head, gayly applauded this eccentric duet, which the
      scholar, with his shrill voice, and the mendicant had just improvised in
      the middle of the prologue.







      Gringoire started, like a man whose wound has been probed to the quick.







      From that moment forth, Gisquette was nothing to him.







      In the meantime, the actors had obeyed his injunction, and the public,
      seeing that they were beginning to speak again, began once more to listen,
      not without having lost many beauties in the sort of soldered joint which
      was formed between the two portions of the piece thus abruptly cut short.







      There was then neither hatred for the cardinal, nor disdain for his
      presence, in the disagreeable impression produced upon Pierre Gringoire.







      The reader can now judge of the effect produced upon him by the abrupt and
      unseasonable arrival of the cardinal.







      Bourbonnais, and his cousin, the Duke of Burgundy, and that one grief had
      consoled him for the other.







      He entered, then, bowed to those present with the hereditary smile of the
      great for the people, and directed his course slowly towards his scarlet
      velvet arm-chair, with the air of thinking of something quite different.







      The man in the leather jerkin shouldered him aside.







      Ghent,” he whispered, very low.







      Sainte-Geneviève, the cardinal’s train-bearer.







      Coppenole was to-day bestowing in marriage, would have been less afraid of
      the cardinal than of the hosier; for it is not a cardinal who would have
      stirred up a revolt among the men of Ghent against the favorites of the
      daughter of Charles the Bold; it is not a cardinal who could have
      fortified the populace with a word against her tears and prayers, when the
      Maid of Flanders came to supplicate her people in their behalf, even at
      the very foot of the scaffold; while the hosier had only to raise his
      leather elbow, in order to cause to fall your two heads, most illustrious
      seigneurs, Guy d’Hymbercourt and Chancellor Guillaume Hugonet.







      Nevertheless, all was over for the poor cardinal, and he was obliged to
      quaff to the dregs the bitter cup of being in such bad company.







      Now, will those of our readers who possess the power of generalizing an
      image or an idea, as the expression runs in the style of to-day, permit us
      to ask them if they have formed a very clear conception of the spectacle
      presented at this moment, upon which we have arrested their attention, by
      the vast parallelogram of the grand hall of the palace.







      We have all forgotten him completely.







      This is precisely what he feared.







      Flemish embassy, in this Episcopal court, under the cardinal’s robe, under
      Coppenole’s jerkin, than painted, decked out, talking in verse, and, so to
      speak, stuffed beneath the yellow amid white tunics in which Gringoire had
      so ridiculously clothed them.







      Nevertheless, when our poet beheld quiet reestablished to some extent, he
      devised a stratagem which might have redeemed all.







      These clamors attracted the attention of the cardinal.







      The bailiff of the courts was a sort of amphibious magistrate, a sort of
      bat of the judicial order, related to both the rat and the bird, the judge
      and the soldier.







      He approached his eminence, and not without a good deal of fear of the
      latter’s displeasure, he awkwardly explained to him the seeming disrespect
      of the audience: that noonday had arrived before his eminence, and that
      the comedians had been forced to begin without waiting for his eminence.







      The cardinal burst into a laugh.







      This was becoming unbearable.







      This strange accompaniment, which rendered it difficult to follow the
      piece, made Gringoire all the more indignant because he could not conceal
      from himself the fact that the interest was continually increasing, and
      that all his work required was a chance of being heard.







      Venus was on the point of carrying it off,—that is to say, without
      allegory, of marrying monsieur the dauphin, when a young child clad in
      white damask, and holding in her hand a daisy (a transparent
      personification of Mademoiselle Marguerite of Flanders) came to contest it
      with Venus.







      Theatrical effect and change.







      Master Coppenole, the hosier, must needs rise of a sudden, and Gringoire
      was forced to listen to him deliver, amid universal attention, the
      following abominable harangue.







      In the twinkling of an eye, all was ready to execute Coppenole’s idea.







      Neuf, those nightmares petrified beneath the hand of Germain Pilon,
      assuming life and breath, and coming in turn to stare you in the face with
      burning eyes; all the masks of the Carnival of Venice passing in
      succession before your glass,—in a word, a human kaleidoscope.







      Gringoire was touched to the heart by the fidelity of his only spectator.







      He approached him and addressed him, shaking his arm slightly; for the
      good man was leaning on the balustrade and dozing a little.







      Gringoire.







      One would have pronounced him a giant who had been broken and badly put
      together again.







      It will be seen that the poor fellow had a choice of surnames.







      The women did, in fact, hide their faces.







      Master Coppenole, in amazement, approached him.







      Quasimodo made no reply.







      He was, in truth, deaf.







      Nevertheless, he began to grow impatient with Coppenole’s behavior, and
      suddenly turned towards him with so formidable a gnashing of teeth, that
      the Flemish giant recoiled, like a bull-dog before a cat.







      Then he beat a retreat, with drooping head, but the last in the field,
      like a general who has fought well.







      BOOK SECOND.







      He was on the point of turning to the Pont Saint-Michel; children were
      running about here and there with fire lances and rockets.







      This cracker made Gringoire’s skin bristle up all over.







      May trusses, from squibs and crackers, to go to the Place de Grève.







      There remains to-day but a very imperceptible vestige of the Place de
      Grève, such as it existed then; it consists in the charming little turret,
      which occupies the angle north of the Place, and which, already enshrouded
      in the ignoble plaster which fills with paste the delicate lines of its
      sculpture, would soon have disappeared, perhaps submerged by that flood of
      new houses which so rapidly devours all the ancient façades of Paris.







      It is a consoling idea (let us remark in passing), to think that the death
      penalty, which three hundred years ago still encumbered with its iron
      wheels, its stone gibbets, and all its paraphernalia of torture, permanent
      and riveted to the pavement, the Grève, the Halles, the Place Dauphine,
      the Cross du Trahoir, the Marché aux Pourceaux, that hideous Montfaucon,
      the barrier des Sergents, the Place aux Chats, the Porte Saint-Denis,
      Champeaux, the Porte Baudets, the Porte Saint Jacques, without reckoning
      the innumerable ladders of the provosts, the bishop of the chapters, of
      the abbots, of the priors, who had the decree of life and death,—without
      reckoning the judicial drownings in the river Seine; it is consoling
      to-day, after having lost successively all the pieces of its armor, its
      luxury of torment, its penalty of imagination and fancy, its torture for
      which it reconstructed every five years a leather bed at the Grand
      Châtelet, that ancient suzerain of feudal society almost expunged from our
      laws and our cities, hunted from code to code, chased from place to place,
      has no longer, in our immense Paris, any more than a dishonored corner of
      the Grève,—than a miserable guillotine, furtive, uneasy, shameful,
      which seems always afraid of being caught in the act, so quickly does it
      disappear after having dealt its blow.







      On looking more closely, he perceived that the circle was much larger than
      was required simply for the purpose of getting warm at the king’s fire,
      and that this concourse of people had not been attracted solely by the
      beauty of the hundred fagots which were burning.







      In a vast space left free between the crowd and the fire, a young girl was
      dancing.







      Whether this young girl was a human being, a fairy, or an angel, is what
      Gringoire, sceptical philosopher and ironical poet that he was, could not
      decide at the first moment, so fascinated was he by this dazzling vision.







      All around her, all glances were riveted, all mouths open; and, in fact,
      when she danced thus, to the humming of the Basque tambourine, which her
      two pure, rounded arms raised above her head, slender, frail and vivacious
      as a wasp, with her corsage of gold without a fold, her variegated gown
      puffing out, her bare shoulders, her delicate limbs, which her petticoat
      revealed at times, her black hair, her eyes of flame, she was a
      supernatural creature.







      At that moment, one of the salamander’s braids of hair became unfastened,
      and a piece of yellow copper which was attached to it, rolled to the
      ground.







      All illusions had disappeared.







      She began her dance once more; she took from the ground two swords, whose
      points she rested against her brow, and which she made to turn in one
      direction, while she turned in the other; it was a purely gypsy effect.







      But, disenchanted though Gringoire was, the whole effect of this picture
      was not without its charm and its magic; the bonfire illuminated, with a
      red flaring light, which trembled, all alive, over the circle of faces in
      the crowd, on the brow of the young girl, and at the background of the
      Place cast a pallid reflection, on one side upon the ancient, black, and
      wrinkled façade of the House of Pillars, on the other, upon the old stone
      gibbet.







      The young girl, stopped at length, breathless, and the people applauded
      her lovingly.







      Then Gringoire saw come up to her, a pretty little white goat, alert,
      wide-awake, glossy, with gilded horns, gilded hoofs, and gilded collar,
      which he had not hitherto perceived, and which had remained lying curled
      up on one corner of the carpet watching his mistress dance.







      And, seating herself, she gracefully presented her tambourine to the goat.







      Djali raised his little gilt hoof, and struck six blows on the tambourine.







      The people were amazed.







      It was that of the bald man, who never removed his eyes from the gypsy.







      She shuddered and turned round; but applause broke forth and drowned the
      morose exclamation.







      It even effaced it so completely from her mind, that she continued to
      question her goat.







      Djali reared himself on his hind legs, and began to bleat, marching along
      with so much dainty gravity, that the entire circle of spectators burst
      into a laugh at this parody of the interested devoutness of the captain of
      pistoliers.







      The goat seated himself on his hind quarters, and began to bleat, waving
      his fore feet in so strange a manner, that, with the exception of the bad
      French, and worse Latin, Jacques Charmolue was there complete,—gesture,
      accent, and attitude.







      And the crowd applauded louder than ever.







      The gypsy turned round once more.







      Big blanks, little blanks, targes<a href="#linknote-8" id="linknoteref-8" class="pginternal">[8]</a> and eagle liards showered into it.







      If he had all Peru in his pocket, he would certainly have given it to the
      dancer; but Gringoire had not Peru, and, moreover, America had not yet
      been discovered.







      Happily, an unexpected incident came to his rescue.







      However, this cry, which alarmed the gypsy, delighted a troop of children
      who were prowling about there.







      All rushed towards the Pillar House.







      The words which she sang were in a tongue unknown to Gringoire, and which
      seemed to him to be unknown to herself, so little relation did the
      expression which she imparted to her song bear to the sense of the words.







      It was the first moment in the course of many hours when he did not feel
      that he suffered.







      The moment was brief.







      The same woman’s voice, which had interrupted the gypsy’s dance,
      interrupted her song.







      This procession, which our readers have seen set out from the Palais de
      Justice, had organized on the way, and had been recruited by all the
      knaves, idle thieves, and unemployed vagabonds in Paris; so that it
      presented a very respectable aspect when it arrived at the Grève.







      Gringoire’s orchestra.







      It was, then, not without surprise and alarm, that at the very moment when
      Quasimodo was passing the Pillar House, in that semi-intoxicated state, a
      man was seen to dart from the crowd, and to tear from his hands, with a
      gesture of anger, his crosier of gilded wood, the emblem of his mock
      popeship.







      He made one bound as far as the priest, looked at him, and fell upon his
      knees.







      The priest tore off his tiara, broke his crozier, and rent his tinsel
      cope.







      At length the archdeacon, giving Quasimodo’s powerful shoulder a rough
      shake, made him a sign to rise and follow him.







      Quasimodo rose.







      Quasimodo placed himself in front of the priest, set in play the muscles
      of his athletic fists, and glared upon the assailants with the snarl of an
      angry tiger.







      The priest resumed his sombre gravity, made a sign to Quasimodo, and
      retired in silence.







      Quasimodo walked in front of him, scattering the crowd as he passed.







      Both were allowed to plunge into a dark and narrow street, where no one
      dared to venture after them; so thoroughly did the mere chimera of
      Quasimodo gnashing his teeth bar the entrance.







      Rue de la Coutellerie.







      If Gringoire had lived in our day, what a fine middle course he would hold
      between classicism and romanticism!







      Moreover, for the purpose of thus following passers-by (and especially
      female passers-by) in the streets, which Gringoire was fond of doing,
      there is no better disposition than ignorance of where one is going to
      sleep.







      So he walked along, very thoughtfully, behind the young girl, who hastened
      her pace and made her goat trot as she saw the <i>bourgeois</i> returning home
      and the taverns—the only shops which had been open that day—closing.







      And in the points of suspense which he placed after this reticence in his
      mind, there lay I know not what flattering ideas.







      Meanwhile, from time to time, as he passed the last groups of <i>bourgeois</i>
      closing their doors, he caught some scraps of their conversation, which
      broke the thread of his pleasant hypotheses.







      Now it was two old men accosting each other.







      Further on there were two female neighbors at their windows, holding
      candles, which the fog caused to sputter.







      Fortunately, he speedily found it again, and he knotted it together
      without difficulty, thanks to the gypsy, thanks to Djali, who still walked
      in front of him; two fine, delicate, and charming creatures, whose tiny
      feet, beautiful forms, and graceful manners he was engaged in admiring,
      almost confusing them in his contemplation; believing them to be both
      young girls, from their intelligence and good friendship; regarding them
      both as goats,—so far as the lightness, agility, and dexterity of
      their walk were concerned.







      The young girl’s attention had been attracted to him for the last few
      moments; she had repeatedly turned her head towards him with uneasiness;
      she had even once come to a standstill, and taking advantage of a ray of
      light which escaped from a half-open bakery to survey him intently, from
      head to foot, then, having cast this glance, Gringoire had seen her make
      that little pout which he had already noticed, after which she passed on.







      He hastened his steps.







      Gringoire did not take to flight, but neither did he advance another step.







      It was a captain of the king’s archers, armed from head to foot, with his
      sword in his hand.







      His companion had disappeared during the struggle.







      And while Captain Phœbus was turning up his moustache in Burgundian
      fashion, she slipped from the horse, like an arrow falling to earth, and
      fled.







      A flash of lightning would have vanished less quickly.







      Gringoire who was not quite dead yet, half raised himself.







      And they fled in their turn.







      Juge, and Corrozet affirm that it was picked up on the morrow, with great
      pomp, by the clergy of the quarter, and borne to the treasury of the
      church of Saint Opportune, where the sacristan, even as late as 1789,
      earned a tolerably handsome revenue out of the great miracle of the Statue
      of the Virgin at the corner of the Rue Mauconseil, which had, by its mere
      presence, on the memorable night between the sixth and seventh of January,
      1482, exorcised the defunct Eustache Moubon, who, in order to play a trick
      on the devil, had at his death maliciously concealed his soul in his straw
      pallet.







      And he passed on.







      Gringoire, who liked noble and classical comparisons, compared him in
      thought to the living tripod of Vulcan.







      And then, in proportion as he plunged deeper into the street, cripples in
      bowls, blind men and lame men, swarmed about him, and men with one arm,
      and with one eye, and the leprous with their sores, some emerging from
      little streets adjacent, some from the air-holes of cellars, howling,
      bellowing, yelping, all limping and halting, all flinging themselves
      towards the light, and humped up in the mire, like snails after a shower.







      Gringoire, still followed by his three persecutors, and not knowing very
      well what was to become of him, marched along in terror among them,
      turning out for the lame, stepping over the cripples in bowls, with his
      feet imbedded in that ant-hill of lame men, like the English captain who
      got caught in the quicksand of a swarm of crabs.







      In the meantime the legless man, erect upon his feet, crowned Gringoire
      with his heavy iron bowl, and the blind man glared in his face with
      flaming eyes!







      They replied by a burst of sinister laughter.







      Cour des Miracles, whither an honest man had never penetrated at such an
      hour; the magic circle where the officers of the Châtelet and the
      sergeants of the provostship, who ventured thither, disappeared in
      morsels; a city of thieves, a hideous wart on the face of Paris; a sewer,
      from which escaped every morning, and whither returned every night to
      crouch, that stream of vices, of mendicancy and vagabondage which always
      overflows in the streets of capitals; a monstrous hive, to which returned
      at nightfall, with their booty, all the drones of the social order; a
      lying hospital where the bohemian, the disfrocked monk, the ruined
      scholar, the ne’er-do-wells of all nations, Spaniards, Italians, Germans,—of
      all religions, Jews, Christians, Mahometans, idolaters, covered with
      painted sores, beggars by day, were transformed by night into brigands; an
      immense dressing-room, in a word, where, at that epoch, the actors of that
      eternal comedy, which theft, prostitution, and murder play upon the
      pavements of Paris, dressed and undressed.







      The poor and flickering flames of the fire permitted Gringoire to
      distinguish, amid his trouble, all around the immense place, a hideous
      frame of ancient houses, whose wormeaten, shrivelled, stunted façades,
      each pierced with one or two lighted attic windows, seemed to him, in the
      darkness, like enormous heads of old women, ranged in a circle, monstrous
      and crabbed, winking as they looked on at the Witches’ Sabbath.







      It was like a new world, unknown, unheard of, misshapen, creeping,
      swarming, fantastic.







      The poet’s already sickly doublet yielded its last sigh in this struggle.







      The Cour des Miracles was, in fact, merely a dram-shop; but a brigand’s
      dram-shop, reddened quite as much with blood as with wine.







      Callot.







      Around a great fire which burned on a large, circular flagstone, the
      flames of which had heated red-hot the legs of a tripod, which was empty
      for the moment, some wormeaten tables were placed, here and there,
      haphazard, no lackey of a geometrical turn having deigned to adjust their
      parallelism, or to see to it that they did not make too unusual angles.







      Stradivarius swoon.







      The three who had Gringoire in their clutches led him in front of this
      hogshead, and the entire bacchanal rout fell silent for a moment, with the
      exception of the cauldron inhabited by the child.







      Gringoire dared neither breathe nor raise his eyes.







      On his head he wore a sort of headgear, bound round and closed at the top.







      But it was difficult to make out whether it was a child’s cap or a king’s
      crown, the two things bore so strong a resemblance to each other.







      Meanwhile Gringoire, without knowing why, had regained some hope, on
      recognizing in the King of the Cour des Miracles his accursed mendicant of
      the Grand Hall.







      The harangue was formidable.







      The King of Thunes scowled.







      Gringoire tried to slip in some excuse between these curt words, which
      wrath rendered more and more jerky.







      So saying, he pointed his finger at the little, bearded Hungarian Jew who
      had accosted Gringoire with his <i>facitote caritatem</i>, and who,
      understanding no other language beheld with surprise the King of Thunes’s
      ill-humor overflow upon him.







      At length Monsieur Clopin calmed down.







      Gringoire mounted the stool, and succeeded, not without some oscillations
      of head and arms, in regaining his centre of gravity.







      Clopin tossed his head.







      He made one more attempt upon Trouillefou.







      Perceiving that no respite, nor reprieve, nor subterfuge was possible, he
      bravely decided upon his course of action; he wound his right foot round
      his left leg, raised himself on his left foot, and stretched out his arm:
      but at the moment when his hand touched the manikin, his body, which was
      now supported upon one leg only, wavered on the stool which had but three;
      he made an involuntary effort to support himself by the manikin, lost his
      balance, and fell heavily to the ground, deafened by the fatal vibration
      of the thousand bells of the manikin, which, yielding to the impulse
      imparted by his hand, described first a rotary motion, and then swayed
      majestically between the two posts.







      Bellevigne de l’Étoile nimbly mounted the transverse beam, and in another
      minute, Gringoire, on raising his eyes, beheld him, with terror, seated
      upon the beam above his head.







      Gringoire shuddered.







      But he paused, as though struck by a sudden thought.







      Gringoire, no doubt, was not very appetizing in this miserable condition.







      The female vagabonds did not seem to be much affected by the proposition.







      Bellevigne de l’Étoile, Andry the Red, François Chanteprune, stepped up
      to Gringoire.







      Gringoire shuddered, and turned towards the side whence the clamor
      proceeded.







      The crowd opened, and gave passage to a pure and dazzling form.







      It was the gypsy.







      Gringoire firmly believed that he had been in a dream ever since morning,
      and that this was the continuation of it.







      The Duke of Egypt brought an earthenware crock, without uttering a word.







      The gypsy offered it to Gringoire: “Fling it on the ground,” said she.







      The crock broke into four pieces.







      Gringoire was able to scrutinize her at his ease.







      Recall these impressions, and you will readily appreciate what Gringoire
      felt on contemplating, beneath her visible and palpable form, that
      Esmeralda of whom, up to that time, he had only caught a glimpse, amidst a
      whirlwind of dance, song, and tumult.







      With this idea in his head and in his eyes, he stepped up to the young
      girl in a manner so military and so gallant that she drew back.







      And, quite ingenuously, he clasped her waist.







      The dragon-fly had turned into a wasp, and asked nothing better than to
      sting.







      The gypsy broke the silence on her side.







      Meanwhile Esmeralda’s dagger and the goat’s horns were still upon the
      defensive.







      The young girl seated opposite him, watched him in silence, visibly
      preoccupied with another thought, at which she smiled from time to time,
      while her soft hand caressed the intelligent head of the goat, gently
      pressed between her knees.







      A candle of yellow wax illuminated this scene of voracity and revery.







      Meanwhile, the first cravings of his stomach having been stilled,
      Gringoire felt some false shame at perceiving that nothing remained but
      one apple.







      She replied by a negative sign of the head, and her pensive glance fixed
      itself upon the vault of the ceiling.







      She seemed not to hear him.







      Esmeralda began to crumble some bread, which Djali ate gracefully from the
      hollow of her hand.







      This “perhaps,” so dear to philosophers, emboldened Gringoire.







      This question made the gypsy shudder.







      La Esmeralda smiled, sighed, and remained silent.







   Quando las pintadas aves,<br>
   Mudas estan, y la tierra—<a href="#linknote-16" id="linknoteref-16" class="pginternal">[16]</a>
</p>
<p>
      She broke off abruptly, and began to caress Djali.







      The poet’s curiosity was more and more aroused.







      She retired into her laconics again.







      She made her customary pretty grimace.







      Gringoire ceased, awaiting the effect of his harangue on the young girl.







      Her eyes were fixed on the ground.







      BOOK THIRD.







      If we had leisure to examine with the reader, one by one, the diverse
      traces of destruction imprinted upon the old church, time’s share would be
      the least, the share of men the most, especially <i>the men of art</i>, since
      there have been individuals who assumed the title of architects during the
      last two centuries.







      And, in the first place, to cite only a few leading examples, there
      certainly are few finer architectural pages than this façade, where,
      successively and at once, the three portals hollowed out in an arch; the
      broidered and dentated cordon of the eight and twenty royal niches; the
      immense central rose window, flanked by its two lateral windows, like a
      priest by his deacon and subdeacon; the frail and lofty gallery of trefoil
      arcades, which supports a heavy platform above its fine, slender columns;
      and lastly, the two black and massive towers with their slate penthouses,
      harmonious parts of a magnificent whole, superposed in five gigantic
      stories;—develop themselves before the eye, in a mass and without
      confusion, with their innumerable details of statuary, carving, and
      sculpture, joined powerfully to the tranquil grandeur of the whole; a vast
      symphony in stone, so to speak; the colossal work of one man and one
      people, all together one and complex, like the Iliads and the Romanceros,
      whose sister it is; prodigious product of the grouping together of all the
      forces of an epoch, where, upon each stone, one sees the fancy of the
      workman disciplined by the genius of the artist start forth in a hundred
      fashions; a sort of human creation, in a word, powerful and fecund as the
      divine creation of which it seems to have stolen the double character,—variety,
      eternity.







      Let us return to the façade of Notre-Dame, as it still appears to us, when
      we go piously to admire the grave and puissant cathedral, which inspires
      terror, so its chronicles assert: <i>quæ mole sua terrorem incutit
      spectantibus</i>.







      Time has caused the staircase to disappear, by raising the soil of the
      city with a slow and irresistible progress; but, while thus causing the
      eleven steps which added to the majestic height of the edifice, to be
      devoured, one by one, by the rising tide of the pavements of Paris,—time
      has bestowed upon the church perhaps more than it has taken away, for it
      is time which has spread over the façade that sombre hue of the centuries
      which makes the old age of monuments the period of their beauty.







      The men, the architects, the artists of our day.







      One would say that it were conscious of the vicinity of the heavy
      Romanesque pillars.







      Notre-Dame de Paris is, in particular, a curious specimen of this variety.







      Each face, each stone of the venerable monument, is a page not only of the
      history of the country, but of the history of science and art as well.







      Church of Saint-Jacques de la Boucherie was so complete a hieroglyph.







      Babel, is a hive.







      That was, in fact,—when, after having long groped one’s way up the
      dark spiral which perpendicularly pierces the thick wall of the belfries,
      one emerged, at last abruptly, upon one of the lofty platforms inundated
      with light and air,—that was, in fact, a fine picture which spread
      out, on all sides at once, before the eye; a spectacle <i>sui generis</i>,
      of which those of our readers who have had the good fortune to see a
      Gothic city entire, complete, homogeneous,—a few of which still
      remain, Nuremberg in Bavaria and Vittoria in Spain,—can readily form
      an idea; or even smaller specimens, provided that they are well preserved,—Vitré
      in Brittany, Nordhausen in Prussia.







      Little by little, the tide of houses, always thrust from the heart of the
      city outwards, overflows, devours, wears away, and effaces this wall.







      Paris slept tranquilly.







      Some traces of this geometrical plan still exist to-day.







      Saint-Denis du Pas (<i>Carcer Glaucini</i>) to the slender needles of
      Saint-Pierre aux Bœufs and Saint-Landry.







      Bernardins the grand enclosure adjoining the Tournelle, to the Hôtel de
      Nesle, whose principal tower ended Paris, and whose pointed roofs were in
      a position, during three months of the year, to encroach, with their black
      triangles, upon the scarlet disk of the setting sun.







      This side of the Seine was, however, the least mercantile of the two.







      Paris.







      Beneath them, at the foot of the formidable edifice, behold the Porte
      Sainte-Antoine, buried between its two towers.







      There to-day is the Place Royale.







      Seine foaming beneath the wheels of the Pont aux Meuniers, there was the
      Châlelet, no longer a Roman tower, as under Julian the Apostate, but a
      feudal tower of the thirteenth century, and of a stone so hard that the
      pickaxe could not break away so much as the thickness of the fist in a
      space of three hours; there was the rich square bell tower of
      Saint-Jacques de la Boucherie, with its angles all frothing with carvings,
      already admirable, although it was not finished in the fifteenth century.







      For-l’Évêque, and you will have a confused picture of what the central
      trapezium of the Town was like in 1482.







      Thus an immense block, which the Romans called <i>insula</i>, or island,
      of <i>bourgeois</i> houses, flanked on the right and the left by two blocks of
      palaces, crowned, the one by the Louvre, the other by the Tournelles,
      bordered on the north by a long girdle of abbeys and cultivated
      enclosures, all amalgamated and melted together in one view; upon these
      thousands of edifices, whose tiled and slated roofs outlined upon each
      other so many fantastic chains, the bell towers, tattooed, fluted, and
      ornamented with twisted bands, of the four and forty churches on the right
      bank; myriads of cross streets; for boundary on one side, an enclosure of
      lofty walls with square towers (that of the University had round towers);
      on the other, the Seine, cut by bridges, and bearing on its bosom a
      multitude of boats; behold the Town of Paris in the fifteenth century.







      Notre-Dame.







      Let us return to Paris and to the fifteenth century.







      Fifty years later, when the Renaissance began to mingle with this unity
      which was so severe and yet so varied, the dazzling luxury of its
      fantasies and systems, its debasements of Roman round arches, Greek
      columns, and Gothic bases, its sculpture which was so tender and so ideal,
      its peculiar taste for arabesques and acanthus leaves, its architectural
      paganism, contemporary with Luther, Paris, was perhaps, still more
      beautiful, although less harmonious to the eye, and to the thought.







      Messidor”<a href="#linknote-24" id="linknoteref-24" class="pginternal">[24]</a> taste;—the Paris of Napoleon in
      the Place Vendôme: this one is sublime, a column of bronze made of
      cannons;—the Paris of the Restoration, at the Bourse: a very
      white colonnade supporting a very smooth frieze; the whole is square
      and cost twenty millions.







      Saint-Eustache; you see light and rapid notes running across it, executing
      three or four luminous zigzags, and vanishing like flashes of lightning.







      Assuredly, this is an opera which it is worth the trouble of listening to.







      BOOK FOURTH.







      Hardly any one was there except old women.







      Henriette la Gaultière, Gauchère la Violette, all four widows, all four
      dames of the Chapel Étienne Haudry, who had quitted their house with the
      permission of their mistress, and in conformity with the statutes of
      Pierre d’Ailly, in order to come and hear the sermon.







      However, if these good Haudriettes were, for the moment, complying with
      the statutes of Pierre d’Ailly, they certainly violated with joy those of
      Michel de Brache, and the Cardinal of Pisa, which so inhumanly enjoined
      silence upon them.







      Jehanne.







      She turned her back, throwing into the basin a silver florin, which rang
      among the liards, and made the poor goodwives of the chapel of Étienne
      Haudry open their eyes.







      A moment later, the grave and learned Robert Mistricolle, the king’s
      protonotary, passed, with an enormous missal under one arm and his wife on
      the other (Damoiselle Guillemette la Mairesse), having thus by his side
      his two regulators,—spiritual and temporal.







      In fact, Claude Frollo was no common person.







      Tancarville, belonging to Master François Le Rez, and the college of
      Tours, in the records deposited at Saint Martin des Champs.







      Quatre-Couronnes.







      Thus, at sixteen years of age, the young clerk might have held his own, in
      mystical theology, against a father of the church; in canonical theology,
      against a father of the councils; in scholastic theology, against a doctor
      of Sorbonne.







      Bishop Theodore opens in 618, and which Pope Gregory closes in 1227.







      Decretals digested, he flung himself upon medicine, on the liberal arts.







      It was at the moment when he was returning, on Quasimodo day, from saying
      his mass at the Altar of the Lazy, which was by the side of the door
      leading to the nave on the right, near the image of the Virgin, that his
      attention had been attracted by the group of old women chattering around
      the bed for foundlings.







      So Quasimodo was the ringer of the chimes of Notre-Dame.







      Later on, the first time that he caught hold, mechanically, of the ropes
      to the towers, and hung suspended from them, and set the bell to clanging,
      it produced upon his adopted father, Claude, the effect of a child whose
      tongue is unloosed and who begins to speak.







      If now we were to try to penetrate to the soul of Quasimodo through that
      thick, hard rind; if we could sound the depths of that badly constructed
      organism; if it were granted to us to look with a torch behind those
      non-transparent organs to explore the shadowy interior of that opaque
      creature, to elucidate his obscure corners, his absurd no-thoroughfares,
      and suddenly to cast a vivid light upon the soul enchained at the
      extremity of that cave, we should, no doubt, find the unhappy Psyche in
      some poor, cramped, and ricketty attitude, like those prisoners beneath
      the Leads of Venice, who grew old bent double in a stone box which was
      both too low and too short for them.







      It is certain that the mind becomes atrophied in a defective body.







      Hence a thousand optical illusions, a thousand aberrations of judgment, a
      thousand deviations, in which his thought strayed, now mad, now idiotic.







      The second effect of his misfortune was to render him malicious.







      His strength, so extraordinarily developed, was a cause of still greater
      malevolence: “<i>Malus puer robustus</i>,” says Hobbes.







      From the chime in the spire, over the intersection of the aisles and nave,
      to the great bell of the front, he cherished a tenderness for them all.







      Quasimodo had fifteen bells in his seraglio; but big Marie was his
      favorite.







      Meanwhile, the tower trembled; he shrieked and gnashed his teeth, his red
      hair rose erect, his breast heaving like a bellows, his eye flashed
      flames, the monstrous bell neighed, panting, beneath him; and then it was
      no longer the great bell of Notre-Dame nor Quasimodo: it was a dream, a
      whirlwind, a tempest, dizziness mounted astride of noise; a spirit
      clinging to a flying crupper, a strange centaur, half man, half bell; a
      sort of horrible Astolphus, borne away upon a prodigious hippogriff of
      living bronze.







      Notre-Dame, and made the deep bowels of the ancient church to palpitate.







      Middle Ages believed him to be its demon: he was in fact its soul.







      It is like a skull which still has holes for the eyes, but no longer
      sight.







      Nevertheless, there was one human creature whom Quasimodo excepted from
      his malice and from his hatred for others, and whom he loved even more,
      perhaps, than his cathedral: this was Claude Frollo.







      Dom Claude scowl; but very droll and very subtle, which made the big
      brother smile.







      Saints-Innocents, where, it is true, his father and mother had been
      buried, with other victims of the plague of 1466; but that he appeared far
      less devout before the cross of their grave than before the strange
      figures with which the tomb of Nicolas Flamel and Claude Pernelle, erected
      just beside it, was loaded.







      Notre-Dame, more than one evil word, more than one ironical quaver, more
      than one insulting jest greeted them on their way, unless Claude Frollo,
      which was rarely the case, walked with head upright and raised, showing
      his severe and almost august brow to the dumbfounded jeerers.







      Claude was too dreamy.







      BOOK FIFTH.







      Franche-Comté accent made all his phrases drag along with the majesty of a
      train-robe.







      There then ensued between the physician and the archdeacon one of those
      congratulatory prologues which, in accordance with custom, at that epoch
      preceded all conversations between learned men, and which did not prevent
      them from detesting each other in the most cordial manner in the world.







      However, it is the same nowadays; every wise man’s mouth complimenting
      another wise man is a vase of honeyed gall.







      Claude Frollo’s felicitations to Jacques Coictier bore reference
      principally to the temporal advantages which the worthy physician had
      found means to extract, in the course of his much envied career, from each
      malady of the king, an operation of alchemy much better and more certain
      than the pursuit of the philosopher’s stone.







      Coictier became crimson with anger.







      Coictier gave a forced laugh.







      And he fell back in his armchair in a commanding and inspired attitude.







      The stranger frowned.







      Claude assumed the majestic and pontifical attitude of a Samuel.







      Christopher, the symbol of the sower, and that of the two angels which are
      on the front of the Sainte-Chapelle, and one of which holds in his hands a
      vase, the other, a cloud—”
     </p>
<p>
      Here Jacques Coictier, who had been unhorsed by the archdeacon’s impetuous
      replies, regained his saddle, and interrupted him with the triumphant tone
      of one learned man correcting another,—“<i>Erras amice Claudi</i>.







      And opening the window of his cell he pointed out with his finger the
      immense church of Notre-Dame, which, outlining against the starry sky the
      black silhouette of its two towers, its stone flanks, its monstrous
      haunches, seemed an enormous two-headed sphinx, seated in the middle of
      the city.







      The archdeacon returned to his chamber dumbfounded, comprehending at last
      who Gossip Tourangeau was, and recalling that passage of the register of
      Sainte-Martin, of Tours:—<i>Abbas beati Martini, SCILICET REX
      FRANCIÆ, est canonicus de consuetudine et habet parvam præbendam quam
      habet sanctus Venantius, et debet sedere in sede thesaurarii</i>.







      Claude’s influence quite overshadowed that of Olivier le Daim and Jacques
      Coictier, who, as was his habit, rudely took the king to task on that
      account.







      In fact, from the origin of things down to the fifteenth century of the
      Christian era, inclusive, architecture is the great book of humanity, the
      principal expression of man in his different stages of development, either
      as a force or as an intelligence.







      Orpheus, who is intelligence, sang;—the pillar, which is a letter;
      the arcade, which is a syllable; the pyramid, which is a word,—all
      set in movement at once by a law of geometry and by a law of poetry,
      grouped themselves, combined, amalgamated, descended, ascended, placed
      themselves side by side on the soil, ranged themselves in stories in the
      sky, until they had written under the dictation of the general idea of an
      epoch, those marvellous books which were also marvellous edifices: the
      Pagoda of Eklinga, the Rhamseion of Egypt, the Temple of Solomon.







      Seignory pierces through sacerdotalism; the commonality, through seignory.







      Nicholas Flamel, in the fifteenth, wrote such seditious pages.







      Saint-Jacques de la Boucherie was a whole church of the opposition.







      God, art was developed in its magnificent proportions.







      Gothic architecture, whatever, nevertheless, may be the diversity of form
      inherent in their nature, the same signification also; that is to say,
      liberty, the people, man.







      In the Hindu, Egyptian, or Romanesque architecture, one feels the priest,
      nothing but the priest, whether he calls himself Brahmin, Magian, or Pope.







      The general characteristics of all theocratic architecture are
      immutability, horror of progress, the preservation of traditional lines,
      the consecration of the primitive types, the constant bending of all the
      forms of men and of nature to the incomprehensible caprices of the symbol.







      In the fifteenth century everything changes.







      It is that setting sun which we mistake for the dawn.







      Hence Raphael, Michael Angelo, Jean Goujon, Palestrina, those splendors of
      the dazzling sixteenth century.







      Thought emancipates itself in all directions at the same time as the arts.







      Whether it be Providence or Fate, Gutenburg is the precursor of Luther.







      This book, written by architecture, must be admired and perused
      incessantly; but the grandeur of the edifice which printing erects in its
      turn must not be denied.







      BOOK SIXTH.







      Grand Châtelet, under the large and flattened arches of Philip Augustus?







      Here, assuredly, is more than sufficient to render a life happy and
      illustrious, and to deserve some day a notable page in that interesting
      history of the provosts of Paris, where one learns that Oudard de
      Villeneuve had a house in the Rue des Boucheries, that Guillaume de
      Hangest purchased the great and the little Savoy, that Guillaume Thiboust
      gave the nuns of Sainte-Geneviève his houses in the Rue Clopin, that
      Hugues Aubriot lived in the Hôtel du Porc-Épic, and other domestic facts.







      The reader can take his choice; we, for our part, are much inclined to
      believe that he was in a bad humor, simply because he was in a bad humor.







      Imagine, in fact, at the provost’s table, leaning upon his elbows between
      two bundles of documents of cases, with his foot on the train of his robe
      of plain brown cloth, his face buried in his hood of white lamb’s skin, of
      which his brows seemed to be of a piece, red, crabbed, winking, bearing
      majestically the load of fat on his cheeks which met under his chin,
      Master Florian Barbedienne, auditor of the Châtelet.







      Moreover, he had in the audience, a pitiless censor of his deeds and
      gestures, in the person of our friend Jehan Frollo du Moulin, that little
      student of yesterday, that “stroller,” whom one was sure of encountering
      all over Paris, anywhere except before the rostrums of the professors.







      It was he indeed.







      It was Quasimodo, bound, encircled, roped, pinioned, and under good guard.







      He cast the same glance about him, but it was so dull and sleepy that the
      women only pointed him out to each other in derision.







      Now this was a case which had not been “provided for by law,” where a deaf
      man should be obliged to question a deaf man.







      This was too much; the provost could no longer restrain himself.







      The clerk set to work incontinently to draw up the account of the
      sentence.







      Frollo du Moulin, from his corner.







      And he signed the sentence thus modified.







      The reader must permit us to take him back to the Place de Grève, which we
      quitted yesterday with Gringoire, in order to follow la Esmeralda.







      This little cell had been celebrated in Paris for nearly three centuries,
      ever since Madame Rolande de la Tour-Roland, in mourning for her father
      who died in the Crusades, had caused it to be hollowed out in the wall of
      her own house, in order to immure herself there forever, keeping of all
      her palace only this lodging whose door was walled up, and whose window
      stood open, winter and summer, giving all the rest to the poor and to God.







      In accordance with the fashion of the epoch, a Latin inscription on the
      wall indicated to the learned passer-by the pious purpose of this cell.







      Castle, <i>Forte scutum, salus ducum</i>; in England, over the principal
      entrance to the hospitable mansion of the Earls Cowper: <i>Tuum est</i>.







      At that time every edifice was a thought.







      As there was no door to the walled cell of the Tour-Roland, these two
      words had been carved in large Roman capitals over the window,—
    </p>
<p class="center">
   TU, ORA.







      Two of these women were dressed like good <i>bourgeoises</i> of Paris.







      We regret to be obliged to add, that, owing to the rigor of the season, he
      was using his tongue as a handkerchief.







      Tantalus of the chubby-cheeked boy.







      Meanwhile, the three demoiselles (for the name of <i>dames</i> was then
      reserved for noble women) were all talking at once.







      Musnier, turned the conversation in time.







      Scourable addressed them a harangue in Latin, which pleased them greatly.







      Gervaise rejoined her.







      Mahiette shook her head with a pensive air.







      Oudarde nodded affirmatively.







      Mahiette sighed, and wiped away a tear which trickled from her eyes.







      Mahiette went on.







      Paquette had never been willing to part with it, wretched as she had been.







      Master Andry Musnier’s, Rue Madame la Valence, when he had the two arms of
      the Seine and the five bridges of the city between the Rat-Hole and the
      cake.







      This question, highly imprudent at the moment when Eustache put it,
      aroused Mahiette’s attention.







      But this did not suit Eustache.







      Mahiette, much touched, stepped up in silence, on tiptoe, as though
      approaching the bedside of a dying person.







      It was, in fact, a melancholy spectacle which presented itself to the eyes
      of the two women, as they gazed through the grating of the Rat-Hole,
      neither stirring nor breathing.







      That figure, which one might have supposed to be riveted to the
      flagstones, appeared to possess neither movement, nor thought, nor breath.







      Nevertheless, at intervals, her blue lips half opened to admit a breath,
      and trembled, but as dead and as mechanical as the leaves which the wind
      sweeps aside.







      Nevertheless, from her dull eyes there escaped a look, an ineffable look,
      a profound, lugubrious, imperturbable look, incessantly fixed upon a
      corner of the cell which could not be seen from without; a gaze which
      seemed to fix all the sombre thoughts of that soul in distress upon some
      mysterious object.







      She thrust her head through the bars, and succeeded in casting a glance at
      the corner where the gaze of the unhappy woman was immovably riveted.







      When she withdrew her head from the window, her countenance was inundated
      with tears.







      Then, laying her finger on her lips, she motioned to the astounded Oudarde
      to thrust her head through the window and look.







      Oudarde looked and beheld, in the corner where the eyes of the recluse
      were fixed in that sombre ecstasy, a tiny shoe of pink satin, embroidered
      with a thousand fanciful designs in gold and silver.







      Gervaise looked after Oudarde, and then the three women, gazing upon the
      unhappy mother, began to weep.







      The same silence; the same immobility.







      It is certain that if the soul had not already quitted this inert,
      sluggish, lethargic body, it had at least retreated and concealed itself
      in depths whither the perceptions of the exterior organs no longer
      penetrated.







      She shook her head in token of refusal.







      Every limb was trembling, her voice quivered, her eyes flashed, she had
      raised herself upon her knees; suddenly she extended her thin, white hand
      towards the child, who was regarding her with a look of astonishment.







      Mahiette, choked to such a point that she could not speak, made an effort.







      A child who innocently blows upon the badly ignited fuse of a bomb, and
      makes it explode in his face, is no more terrified than was Mahiette at
      the effect of that name, abruptly launched into the cell of Sister Gudule.







      The recluse trembled all over, rose erect on her bare feet, and leaped at
      the window with eyes so glaring that Mahiette and Oudarde, and the other
      woman and the child recoiled even to the parapet of the quay.







      Place de Grève, around the pillory and the gibbet.







      That crowd which the four sergeants posted at nine o’clock in the morning
      at the four corners of the pillory had inspired with the hope of some sort
      of an execution, no doubt, not a hanging, but a whipping, a cropping of
      ears, something, in short,—that crowd had increased so rapidly that
      the four policemen, too closely besieged, had had occasion to “press” it,
      as the expression then ran, more than once, by sound blows of their whips,
      and the haunches of their horses.







      They were forced to content themselves with those four stretches of rubble
      work, backed with sandstone, and a wretched stone gibbet, meagre and bare,
      on one side.







      They placed him on his knees on the circular plank; he made no resistance.







      And the crowd burst into a laugh, especially the boys and young girls.







      All at once, at the moment when the wheel in its revolution presented to
      Master Pierrat, the humped back of Quasimodo, Master Pierrat raised his
      arm; the fine thongs whistled sharply through the air, like a handful of
      adders, and fell with fury upon the wretch’s shoulders.







      Soon the blood burst forth, and could be seen trickling in a thousand
      threads down the hunchback’s black shoulders; and the slender thongs, in
      their rotatory motion which rent the air, sprinkled drops of it upon the
      crowd.







      Torterue allowed the thongs, red and gorged with blood, to drip upon the
      pavement.







      So the hour-glass was turned over once more, and they left the hunchback
      fastened to the plank, in order that justice might be accomplished to the
      very end.







      A thousand other insults rained down upon him, and hoots and imprecations,
      and laughter, and now and then, stones.







      Quasimodo was deaf but his sight was clear, and the public fury was no
      less energetically depicted on their visages than in their words.







      Moreover, the blows from the stones explained the bursts of laughter.







      This priest was Archdeacon Dom Claude Frollo.







      And all began to laugh.







      She approached, without uttering a syllable, the victim who writhed in a
      vain effort to escape her, and detaching a gourd from her girdle, she
      raised it gently to the parched lips of the miserable man.







      Then the poor deaf man fixed on her a look full of reproach and
      inexpressible sadness.







      VOLUME II.







      BOOK SEVENTH.







      Many weeks had elapsed.







      This was the hour.







      The balcony on which these young girls stood opened from a chamber richly
      tapestried in fawn-colored Flanders leather, stamped with golden foliage.







      Jupiter, which the reader has already been enabled to admire in the first
      book of this history, for us to inflict upon him a second description.







      The poor dame, very much infatuated with her daughter, like any other
      silly mother, did not perceive the officer’s lack of enthusiasm, and
      strove in low tones to call his attention to the infinite grace with which
      Fleur-de-Lys used her needle or wound her skein.







      The captain took up a corner of the tapestry.







      His eyes, intently fixed, gazed into the Place.







      It was something like the immobility of a bird of prey, who has just
      discovered a nest of sparrows, and is gazing at it.







      Gaillefontaine.







      The young girl looked at him again, then she blushed as though a flame had
      mounted into her cheeks, and, taking her tambourine under her arm, she
      made her way through the astonished spectators towards the door of the
      house where Phœbus was calling her, with slow, tottering steps, and with
      the troubled look of a bird which is yielding to the fascination of a
      serpent.







      A moment later, the tapestry portière was raised, and the gypsy appeared
      on the threshold of the chamber, blushing, confused, breathless, her large
      eyes drooping, and not daring to advance another step.







      Bérangère clapped her hands.







      This remark, which a more delicate admirer would have uttered in a lower
      tone, at least was not of a nature to dissipate the feminine jealousies
      which were on the alert before the gypsy.







      The others whispered.







      The gypsy advanced towards the noble dame.







      The captain burst out laughing.







      Gaillefontaine.







      Phœbus laughed, and took the gypsy’s part with a mixture of impertinence
      and pity.







      At this reply uttered carelessly by the captain, like a stray stone, whose
      fall one does not even watch, Colombe began to laugh, as well as Diane,
      Amelotte, and Fleur-de-Lys, into whose eyes at the same time a tear
      started.







      The old dame, who was watching this scene, felt offended, without
      understanding why.







      It was the goat, who had just arrived, in search of his mistress, and who,
      in dashing towards the latter, had begun by entangling his horns in the
      pile of stuffs which the noble dame’s garments heaped up on her feet when
      she was seated.







      Meanwhile, Diane had bent down to Colombe’s ear.







      Diane and Colombe eagerly addressed the gypsy.







      At this strange name, a burst of wild laughter broke from the young girls.







         PHŒBUS.







      It was impossible to doubt it; the child did not know how to write.







      Meanwhile, at the child’s exclamation, all had hastened up, the mother,
      the young girls, the gypsy, and the officer.







      She fell fainting.







      In a twinkling, La Esmeralda gathered up the unlucky letters, made a sign
      to Djali, and went out through one door, while Fleur-de-Lys was being
      carried out through the other.







      Captain Phœbus, on being left alone, hesitated for a moment between the
      two doors, then he followed the gypsy.







      The priest whom the young girls had observed at the top of the North
      tower, leaning over the Place and so attentive to the dance of the gypsy,
      was, in fact, Archdeacon Claude Frollo.







      There he stood, grave, motionless, absorbed in one look and one thought.







      All Paris lay at his feet, with the thousand spires of its edifices and
      its circular horizon of gentle hills—with its river winding under
      its bridges, and its people moving to and fro through its streets,—with
      the clouds of its smoke,—with the mountainous chain of its roofs
      which presses Notre-Dame in its doubled folds; but out of all the city,
      the archdeacon gazed at one corner only of the pavement, the Place du
      Parvis; in all that throng at but one figure,—the gypsy.







      The gypsy was dancing; she was twirling her tambourine on the tip of her
      finger, and tossing it into the air as she danced Provençal sarabands;
      agile, light, joyous, and unconscious of the formidable gaze which
      descended perpendicularly upon her head.







      The harsh voice of the archdeacon threw the poor fellow into such a
      commotion that he lost his equilibrium, together with his whole edifice,
      and the chair and the cat tumbled pell-mell upon the heads of the
      spectators, in the midst of inextinguishable hootings.







      It is probable that Master Pierre Gringoire (for it was indeed he) would
      have had a sorry account to settle with the neighbor who owned the cat,
      and all the bruised and scratched faces which surrounded him, if he had
      not hastened to profit by the tumult to take refuge in the church, whither
      Claude Frollo had made him a sign to follow him.







      So, when you addressed me, I was as foolish as an ass before a turnspit.







      The priest’s gloomy eyes flashed into flame.







      The archdeacon pressed Gringoire with questions.







      Esmeralda had come to France while still very young, by way of Hungary.







      Dom Claude frowned.







      The archdeacon’s pale face became as crimson as the cheek of a young girl.







      Notre-Dame, and that the great bell and her fourteen sisters were
      neglected for something more amiable and more beautiful?







      He went and came, he beat his hands together, he ran from rope to rope, he
      animated the six singers with voice and gesture, like the leader of an
      orchestra who is urging on intelligent musicians.







      He was wholly absorbed in spurring on his bells, all six of which vied
      with each other in leaping and shaking their shining haunches, like a
      noisy team of Spanish mules, pricked on here and there by the apostrophes
      of the muleteer.







      Pont du Change, and who went away dumbfounded, like a dog who has been
      offered a bone and given a stone.







      It chanced that upon a fine morning in this same month of March, I think
      it was on Saturday the 29th, Saint Eustache’s day, our young friend the
      student, Jehan Frollo du Moulin, perceived, as he was dressing himself,
      that his breeches, which contained his purse, gave out no metallic ring.







      Then he hastily donned his long jacket with furred half-sleeves, picked up
      his cap, and went out like a man driven to desperation.







      Jehan clapped his hands.







      The key was in the lock, the door was very close to him; he gave it a
      gentle push and thrust his head through the opening.







      And he closed the book violently.







      He passed his hand over his brow, as though to brush away the idea which
      assailed him; then he took from the table a nail and a small hammer, whose
      handle was curiously painted with cabalistic letters.







      The archdeacon returned and seated himself in his armchair, and placed his
      head on both his hands, as a sick man does, whose head is heavy and
      burning.







      We do not know whether he suddenly became conscious of these things; but,
      giddy as he was, he understood that he had seen what he ought not to have
      seen, that he had just surprised the soul of his elder brother in one of
      its most secret altitudes, and that Claude must not be allowed to know it.







      Seeing that the archdeacon had fallen back into his former immobility, he
      withdrew his head very softly, and made some noise with his feet outside
      the door, like a person who has just arrived and is giving warning of his
      approach.







      Dom Claude’s visage had resumed its severe expression.







      Dom Claude made his arm-chair describe a quarter circle, and gazed
      intently at Jehan.







      Jehan did not reply.







      Dom Claude turned pale again, and the scholar pursued carelessly.







      Master Jehan, who possessed all the artful ways of a spoiled child, judged
      that the moment was a favorable one in which to risk his request.







      At this audacious declaration, the archdeacon’s visage assumed a
      thoroughly pedagogical and paternal expression.







      Jehan broke the ice once more.







      The scholar made one more effort.







      The scholar remained silent for a moment, with his finger in his ear, his
      eyes on the ground, and a discomfited mien.







      All at once he turned round to Claude with the agile quickness of a
      wagtail.







      The archdeacon promptly returned to his original severity.







      Dom Claude shook his wrinkled head: “<i>Qui non laborat</i>—”
     </p>
<p>
      Jehan did not allow him to finish.







      The archdeacon surveyed him with a gloomy air.







      At that moment, the sound of a footstep was heard on the staircase.







      The scholar concealed himself; just then a happy idea occurred to him.







      Jehan darted under the furnace again, and the door opened.







      When Jehan saw that it was only this, that is to say, no doubt a physician
      or a magistrate, and that this man had a nose very far from his mouth, a
      sign of stupidity, he nestled down in his hole, in despair at being
      obliged to pass an indefinite time in such an uncomfortable attitude, and
      in such bad company.







      There was in the two ways in which “Master Jacques” was pronounced on the
      one hand, and the “master” by preeminence on the other, the difference
      between monseigneur and monsieur, between <i>domine</i> and <i>domne</i>.







      It was evidently the meeting of a teacher and a disciple.







      It was a vessel belonging to the same family as those which covered Dom
      Claude’s furnace.







      Italian doctor who had a bearded demon who acquainted him with all things.







      The archdeacon was excessively pale.







      Dom Claude, buried in his own thoughts, no longer listened to him.







      At that moment the sound of jaws in the act of mastication, which
      proceeded from beneath the furnace, struck Charmolue’s uneasy ear.







      This explanation satisfied Charmolue.







      He cast a glance of tenderness and admiration into the interior of the
      precious pouch, readjusted his toilet, rubbed up his boots, dusted his
      poor half sleeves, all gray with ashes, whistled an air, indulged in a
      sportive pirouette, looked about to see whether there were not something
      more in the cell to take, gathered up here and there on the furnace some
      amulet in glass which might serve to bestow, in the guise of a trinket, on
      Isabeau la Thierrye, finally pushed open the door which his brother had
      left unfastened, as a last indulgence, and which he, in his turn, left
      open as a last piece of malice, and descended the circular staircase,
      skipping like a bird.







      Place, he laughed yet more heartily.







      This proposition calmed the captain.







      Charmolue where he stood, had approached them and halted a few paces
      distant, watching them without their noticing him, so deeply were they
      absorbed in contemplation of the purse.







      And without adding another word, he emptied the purse on a neighboring
      post, with the air of a Roman saving his country.







      Phœbus, and that magic name sufficed to make the archdeacon follow the
      two heedless comrades with the stealthy tread of a wolf, listening to
      their words and observing their slightest gestures with anxious attention.







      Here the archdeacon saw Phœbus sneer, bend down to Jehan’s ear, and say a
      few words to him in a low voice; then Phœbus burst into a laugh, and
      shook his head with a triumphant air.







         Les enfants des Petits-Carreaux<br>
         Se font pendre comme des veaux<a href="#linknote-42" id="linknoteref-42" class="pginternal">[42]</a>.







      The man in the mantle went and stationed himself on the watch under a
      porch on the other side of the street.







      The man in the mantle, who had not ceased to follow him, halted for a
      moment before the prostrate scholar, as though agitated by indecision;
      then, uttering a profound sigh, he also strode off in pursuit of the
      captain.







      We, like them, will leave Jehan to slumber beneath the open sky, and will
      follow them also, if it pleases the reader.







      At this name, the shadow’s grasp shook the arm of Phœbus in a fury.







      He replaced his sword in its scabbard.







      Saint-Michel, then loaded with houses.







      The interior of the den was no less dilapitated than she; there were chalk
      walls, blackened beams in the ceiling, a dismantled chimney-piece,
      spiders’ webs in all the corners, in the middle a staggering herd of
      tables and lame stools, a dirty child among the ashes, and at the back a
      staircase, or rather, a wooden ladder, which ended in a trapdoor in the
      ceiling.







      The light had disappeared.







      What was taking place at that moment in the gloomy soul of the archdeacon?







      God and himself could alone know.







      When he recovered himself, Phœbus and Esmeralda were alone seated on the
      wooden coffer beside the lamp which made these two youthful figures and a
      miserable pallet at the end of the attic stand out plainly before the
      archdeacon’s eyes.







      Beside the pallet was a window, whose panes broken like a spider’s web
      upon which rain has fallen, allowed a view, through its rent meshes, of a
      corner of the sky, and the moon lying far away on an eiderdown bed of soft
      clouds.







      The captain was very gallantly clad; he had tufts of embroidery at his
      neck and wrists; a great elegance at that day.







      It was not without difficulty that Dom Claude managed to hear what they
      were saying, through the humming of the blood, which was boiling in his
      temples.







      So saying, she fixed upon the captain her great black eyes, moist with joy
      and tenderness.







      The priest saw it, and tested with the tip of his finger the point of a
      poniard which he wore concealed in his breast.







      Phœbus returned and seated himself beside her, but much closer than
      before.







      The gypsy gave him several little taps with her pretty hand on his mouth,
      with a childish mirth and grace and gayety.







      For several moments the young girl, absorbed in her charming thoughts, was
      dreaming to the sound of his voice, without listening to the sense of his
      words.







      She became pensive and silent once more.







      The captain, emboldened by her gentleness, clasped her waist without
      resistance; then began softly to unlace the poor child’s corsage, and
      disarranged her tucker to such an extent that the panting priest beheld
      the gypsy’s beautiful shoulder emerge from the gauze, as round and brown
      as the moon rising through the mists of the horizon.







      The captain’s face assumed an expression of mingled surprise and disdain,
      of carelessness and libertine passion.







      The Bohemian turned pale, and her head drooped sadly on her breast.







      While speaking thus in his softest voice, he approached extremely near the
      gypsy; his caressing hands resumed their place around her supple and
      delicate waist, his eye flashed more and more, and everything announced
      that Monsieur Phœbus was on the verge of one of those moments when
      Jupiter himself commits so many follies that Homer is obliged to summon a
      cloud to his rescue.







      Her eyes were lowered.







      But the captain’s gesture had revealed the mysterious amulet which she
      wore about her neck.







      She fainted.







      At the moment when her eyes closed, when all feeling vanished in her, she
      thought that she felt a touch of fire imprinted upon her lips, a kiss more
      burning than the red-hot iron of the executioner.







      BOOK EIGHTH.







      Gringoire and the entire Court of Miracles were suffering mortal anxiety.







      Saint Victor, printed with the celebrated characters of Vindelin de
      Spire).







      One day, as he was passing sadly before the criminal Tournelle, he
      perceived a considerable crowd at one of the gates of the Palais de
      Justice.







      He dared not tell the young man that he was acquainted with his brother
      the archdeacon, to whom he had not returned after the scene in the church;
      a negligence which embarrassed him.







      Gringoire.







      Of the black man nothing could be seen but his eyes, two coals of fire.







      Gringoire’s neighbors.







      Gringoire himself was not disinclined to regard this as altogether
      alarming and probable.







      A bailiff handed the dead leaf to the crocodile, who made a doleful shake
      of the head, and passed it on to the president, who gave it to the
      procurator of the king in the ecclesiastical court, and thus it made the
      circuit of the hall.







      A counsellor took up the word.







      A murmur ran through the crowd.







      But Master Philippe Lheulier, advocate extraordinary to the king,
      interposed once more.







      This conclusive observation appeared to dissipate all the doubts of
      Gringoire and the other sceptics in the audience.







      At that name, the accused sprang up, her head rose above the throng.







      Gringoire with horror recognized la Esmeralda.







      The unhappy girl fell back on her criminal’s seat, speechless, tearless,
      white as a wax figure.







      The president bent down to a man at his feet, who wore a gold cap and a
      black gown, a chain on his neck and a wand in his hand.







      Jacques Charmolue interfered.







      Meanwhile the procurator had exclaimed: “If the demon which possesses this
      goat, and which has resisted all exorcisms, persists in its deeds of
      witchcraft, if it alarms the court with them, we warn it that we shall be
      forced to put in requisition against it the gallows or the stake.







      The goat looked at it with an intelligent eye, raised its gilded hoof, and
      struck seven blows.







      Gringoire could not endure it.







      However, she betrayed no sign of life; neither Djali’s graceful
      evolutions, nor the menaces of the court, nor the suppressed imprecations
      of the spectators any longer reached her mind.







      Charmolue and the priests of the officiality, between two rows of
      halberds, towards a medium-sized door which suddenly opened and closed
      again behind her, and which produced upon the grief-stricken Gringoire the
      effect of a horrible mouth which had just devoured her.







      When she disappeared, they heard a plaintive bleating; it was the little
      goat mourning.







      This Tartarus was called simply, The Question Chamber.







      In vain did the poor girl summon up her courage; on entering this chamber
      she was stricken with horror.







      Master Jacques Charmolue approached the gypsy with a very sweet smile.







      Pierrat rose with a growl.







      She shuddered.







      This time she could only make a sign with her head.







      Charmolue hesitated for a moment with the ambiguous grimace of a poet in
      search of a rhyme.







      The unfortunate girl felt herself so utterly abandoned by God and men,
      that her head fell upon her breast like an inert thing which has no power
      in itself.







      The miserable body which that frightful swarm of saws, wheels, and racks
      were about to clasp in their clutches, the being who was about to be
      manipulated by the harsh hands of executioners and pincers, was that
      gentle, white, fragile creature, a poor grain of millet which human
      justice was handing over to the terrible mills of torture to grind.







      Meanwhile, the callous hands of Pierrat Torterue’s assistants had bared
      that charming leg, that tiny foot, which had so often amazed the
      passers-by with their delicacy and beauty, in the squares of Paris.







      She darted from the bed to fling herself at the feet of the king’s
      procurator, but her leg was fast in the heavy block of oak and iron, and
      she sank down upon the boot, more crushed than a bee with a lump of lead
      on its wing.







      At a sign from Charmolue, she was replaced on the bed, and two coarse
      hands adjusted to her delicate waist the strap which hung from the
      ceiling.







      Charmolue, with his imperturbable benignity.







      Pierrat turned the handle of the screw-jack, the boot was contracted, and
      the unhappy girl uttered one of those horrible cries which have no
      orthography in any human language.







      It was evident that everything within her was broken.







      When the prisoner had been “unbooted,” the procurator of the
      ecclesiastical court examined her foot, which was still swollen with pain.







      All at once, in the middle of a fine period, he interrupted himself, and
      his glance, ordinarily so gentle and even stupid, became menacing.







      He put on his cap again and seated himself.







      Then the clerk began to write; then he handed a long parchment to the
      president.







      WHO ENTER HERE.







      Assuredly, Providence and society had been equally unjust; such an excess
      of unhappiness and of torture was not necessary to break so frail a
      creature.







      This drop of water falling from time to time into that pool, was the only
      movement which still went on around her, the only clock which marked the
      time, the only noise which reached her of all the noise made on the
      surface of the earth.







      To tell the whole, however, she also felt, from time to time, in that
      cesspool of mire and darkness, something cold passing over her foot or her
      arm, and she shuddered.







      At length, one day, or one night, (for midnight and midday were of the
      same color in that sepulchre), she heard above her a louder noise than was
      usually made by the turnkey when he brought her bread and jug of water.







      She raised her head, and beheld a ray of reddish light passing through the
      crevices in the sort of trapdoor contrived in the roof of the <i>inpace</i>.







      At last the prisoner broke the silence.







      The words, the accent, the sound of his voice made her tremble.







      Her head, which had been raised with joy, fell back upon her breast.







      She took her feet in her hands, a gesture habitual with unhappy wretches
      who are cold, as we have already seen in the case of the recluse of the
      Tour-Roland, and her teeth chattered.







      The priest appeared to cast his eyes around the dungeon from beneath his
      cowl.







      All at once she began to weep like a child.







      Falourdel’s, above the head of her adored Phœbus; that eye which she last
      had seen glittering beside a dagger.







      Then she dropped her arms in discouragement, and remained seated, with
      lowered head, eyes fixed on the ground, mute and still trembling.







      The priest gazed at her with the eye of a hawk which has long been soaring
      in a circle from the heights of heaven over a poor lark cowering in the
      wheat, and has long been silently contracting the formidable circles of
      his flight, and has suddenly swooped down upon his prey like a flash of
      lightning, and holds it panting in his talons.







      She made no reply.







      Her lips contracted, as though with a smile.







      Both remained silent for several minutes, crushed beneath the weight of
      their emotions; he maddened, she stupefied.







      Here the priest paused, and the prisoner heard sighs of anguish break from
      his breast with a sound of the death rattle.







      He made another pause and went on,—
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, dating from that day, there was within me a man whom I did not know.







      Every evening I returned to myself more charmed, more despairing, more
      bewitched, more lost!







      I denounced you to the official.







      He ceased.







      The prisoner recoiled with horror.







      The priest dragged himself towards her on his knees.







      She interrupted with a terrible and thrilling laugh.







      The priest remained for several moments as though petrified, with his eyes
      fixed upon his hand.







      He seized her arm, he was beside himself, he tried to drag her away.







      She fixed her eye intently on him.







      He was not listening to her.







      The young girl flung herself upon him like a raging tigress, and pushed
      him upon the steps of the staircase with supernatural force.







      She fell face downwards upon the floor, and there was no longer any sound
      audible in the cell than the sob of the drop of water which made the pool
      palpitate amid the darkness.







      Never was more despair bestowed upon a prettier and more graceful thing.







      It seemed as though her grief were breaking forth more violently than
      usual; and she could be heard outside lamenting in a loud and monotonous
      voice which rent the heart.







      The priest looked at her and made no reply; she repeated her question.







      Then Paquette la Chantefleurie burst into hyena-like laughter.







      His head fell upon his bosom and he moved slowly away.







      The recluse writhed her arms with joy.







      And she began to pace up and down with long strides before the grating of
      her window, her hair dishevelled, her eyes flashing, with her shoulder
      striking against the wall, with the wild air of a female wolf in a cage,
      who has long been famished, and who feels the hour for her repast drawing
      near.







      Any man would have done the same in his place.







      Paris.







        Ashamed as a fox who has been caught by a fowl.







      Queue-en-Brie was a very insipid place to stay at then, a village of
      farriers, and cow-girls with chapped hands, a long line of poor dwellings
      and thatched cottages, which borders the grand road on both sides for half
      a league; a tail (queue), in short, as its name imports.







      Fleur-de-Lys was his last passion but one, a pretty girl, a charming
      dowry; accordingly, one fine morning, quite cured, and assuming that,
      after the lapse of two months, the Bohemian affair must be completely
      finished and forgotten, the amorous cavalier arrived on a prancing horse
      at the door of the Gondelaurier mansion.







      He paid no attention to a tolerably numerous rabble which had assembled in
      the Place du Parvis, before the portal of Notre-Dame; he remembered that
      it was the month of May; he supposed that it was some procession, some
      Pentecost, some festival, hitched his horse to the ring at the door, and
      gayly ascended the stairs to his beautiful betrothed.







      She was alone with her mother.







      Fleur-de-Lys’s reproaches, they expired in tender cooings.







      She could not repress a smile.







      Phœbus was delighted with the first question, which helped him to avoid
      the second.







      Here Phœbus was rather seriously embarrassed.







      The poor child was completely upset.







      Here Phœbus, whose imagination was endowed with but mediocre power of
      creation, began to find himself in a quandary as to a means of extricating
      himself for his prowess.







      He approached the window.







      The captain was so thoroughly persuaded that la Esmeralda’s affair was
      concluded, that he was but little disturbed by Fleur-de-Lys’s words.







      Still, he asked her one or two questions.







      She shrugged her white shoulders.







      Meanwhile, the good mother, charmed to see the betrothed pair on terms of
      such perfect understanding, had just quitted the apartment to attend to
      some domestic matter; Phœbus observed it, and this so emboldened the
      adventurous captain that very strange ideas mounted to his brain.







      And like a fawn who feels the breath of the pack of hounds, she rose, ran
      to the window, opened it, and rushed upon the balcony.







      Phœbus, much discomfited, followed her.







      The Place du Parvis Notre-Dame, upon which the balcony looked, as the
      reader knows, presented at that moment a singular and sinister spectacle
      which caused the fright of the timid Fleur-de-Lys to change its nature.







      From time to time, a sharp and vibrating voice pierced the general clamor.







      Fleur-de-Lys pressed her hands to her eyes, that she might not see.







      Master Jacques Charmolue paraded at their head.







      Phœbus interrupted her.







      The tumbrel had entered the Parvis.







      This chant, which a few old men buried in the gloom sang from afar over
      that beautiful creature, full of youth and life, caressed by the warm air
      of spring, inundated with sunlight was the mass for the dead.







      The people listened devoutly.







      At the moment when he made his appearance in the full daylight beneath the
      lofty arched portal, enveloped in an ample cope of silver barred with a
      black cross, he was so pale that more than one person in the crowd thought
      that one of the marble bishops who knelt on the sepulchral stones of the
      choir had risen and was come to receive upon the brink of the tomb, the
      woman who was about to die.







      Then she felt her blood boil in her head, and a remnant of indignation
      flashed up in that soul already benumbed and cold.







      The crowd knelt.







      At the same time, the intermittent clash of the iron butts of the beadles’
      halberds, gradually dying away among the columns of the nave, produced the
      effect of a clock hammer striking the last hour of the condemned.







      The doors of Notre-Dame remained open, allowing a view of the empty
      desolate church, draped in mourning, without candles, and without voices.







      Charmolue of the fact, as the latter, during this entire scene, had been
      engaged in studying the bas-relief of the grand portal which represents,
      according to some, the sacrifice of Abraham; according to others, the
      philosopher’s alchemical operation: the sun being figured forth by the
      angel; the fire, by the fagot; the artisan, by Abraham.







      There was considerable difficulty in drawing him away from that
      contemplation, but at length he turned round; and, at a signal which he
      gave, two men clad in yellow, the executioner’s assistants, approached the
      gypsy to bind her hands once more.







      And she tried to stretch towards him arms trembling with love and rapture,
      but they were bound.







      Then she saw the captain frown, a beautiful young girl who was leaning
      against him gazed at him with disdainful lips and irritated eyes; then
      Phœbus uttered some words which did not reach her, and both disappeared
      precipitately behind the window opening upon the balcony, which closed
      after them.







      Châteaupers.







      This was done with such rapidity, that had it taken place at night, the
      whole of it could have been seen in the space of a single flash of
      lightning.







      BOOK NINTH.







      And when he sought to picture to himself the happiness which he might have
      found upon earth, if she had not been a gypsy, and if he had not been a
      priest, if Phœbus had not existed and if she had loved him; when he
      pictured to himself that a life of serenity and love would have been
      possible to him also, even to him; that there were at that very moment,
      here and there upon the earth, happy couples spending the hours in sweet
      converse beneath orange trees, on the banks of brooks, in the presence of
      a setting sun, of a starry night; and that if God had so willed, he might
      have formed with her one of those blessed couples,—his heart melted
      in tenderness and despair.







      There was another moment when, while laughing diabolically at himself, he
      represented to himself la Esmeralda as he had seen her on that first day,
      lively, careless, joyous, gayly attired, dancing, winged, harmonious, and
      la Esmeralda of the last day, in her scanty shift, with a rope about her
      neck, mounting slowly with her bare feet, the angular ladder of the
      gallows; he figured to himself this double picture in such a manner that
      he gave vent to a terrible cry.







      Esmeralda appeared to him like a star, the gibbet like an enormous,
      fleshless arm.







      Augustines, the tower of Nesle, all these projections which broke the
      profile of the colossal obelisk added to the illusion by displaying in
      eccentric fashion to the eye the indentations of a luxuriant and fantastic
      sculpture.







      But the vision was in himself.







      Montfaucon clashing together in the gloom.







      Falourdel; the girl was a courtesan; the young man was his brother Jehan.







      This fine pleasantry made the courtesan laugh, and Jehan left the room.







      Dom Claude had barely time to fling himself on the ground in order that he
      might not be met, stared in the face and recognized by his brother.







      He stirred up Dom Claude with his foot, and the latter held his breath.







      Then the archdeacon rose to his feet, and ran without halting, towards
      Notre-Dame, whose enormous towers he beheld rising above the houses
      through the gloom.







      At the instant when he arrived, panting, on the Place du Parvis, he shrank
      back and dared not raise his eyes to the fatal edifice.







      This fever or madness had reached such a degree of intensity that the
      external world was no longer anything more for the unhappy man than a sort
      of Apocalypse,—visible, palpable, terrible.







      He slowly climbed the stairs of the towers, filled with a secret fright
      which must have been communicated to the rare passers-by in the Place du
      Parvis by the mysterious light of his lamp, mounting so late from loophole
      to loophole of the bell tower.







      He lowered his gaze, and contemplated for a moment, through the railing of
      slender columns which unites the two towers, far away, through a gauze of
      mists and smoke, the silent throng of the roofs of Paris, pointed,
      innumerable, crowded and small like the waves of a tranquil sea on a
      sum-mer night.







      The moon cast a feeble ray, which imparted to earth and heaven an ashy
      hue.







      She was dressed in white and had a white veil on her head.







      Saint-Denis, the pack of hounds stopped short and barked.







      Saint-Jacques de la Boucherie, a chamber which cost him four livres six
      sous, sixteen farthings, parisis.







      At Notre-Dame it was a tiny cell situated on the roof of the side aisle,
      beneath the flying buttresses, precisely at the spot where the wife of the
      present janitor of the towers has made for herself a garden, which is to
      the hanging gardens of Babylon what a lettuce is to a palm-tree, what a
      porter’s wife is to a Semiramis.







      Paris checkered with its thousand roofs of slate and tiles, like a red and
      blue mosaic, above her head the frightful and joyous face of Quasimodo.







      Then her eyelids drooped again; she thought that all was over, that they
      had executed her during her swoon, and that the misshapen spirit which had
      presided over her destiny, had laid hold of her and was bearing her away.







      It was his own repast, it was his own bed, which the bellringer had gone
      in search of.







      At the same time, as though an invisible hand had lifted the weight which
      had repressed her tears in her heart for so long, she began to weep, and,
      in proportion as her tears flowed, she felt all that was most acrid and
      bitter in her grief depart with them.







      She could not comprehend the existence of a being so awkwardly fashioned.







      Yet there was so much sadness and so much gentleness spread over all this,
      that she began to become reconciled to it.







      He began to smile sadly.







      He watched her attentively while she was speaking.







      He drew from his pocket a little metal whistle.







      He laid the whistle on the floor and fled.







      Love is like a tree; it sprouts forth of itself, sends its roots out
      deeply through our whole being, and often continues to flourish greenly
      over a heart in ruins.







      She gazed at him in amazement.







      On another occasion, he came to her with an awkward and timid air.







      She uttered a cry of joy.







      When he reached the Place, he no longer saw anything except the handsome
      horse hitched at the door of the Gondelaurier house; the captain had just
      entered there.







      Gondelaurier porch, determined to wait until the captain should come
      forth.







      The entire day passed thus, Quasimodo at his post, la Esmeralda on the
      roof, Phœbus, no doubt, at the feet of Fleur-de-Lys.







      Notre-Dame.







      Towards one o’clock in the morning, the guests began to take their leave.







      Fortunately, for the young girl was beginning to resist but feebly, the
      door of the balcony suddenly opened once more and an old dame appeared;
      the beauty seemed confused, the officer assumed an air of displeasure, and
      all three withdrew.







      A moment later, a horse was champing his bit under the porch, and the
      brilliant officer, enveloped in his night cloak, passed rapidly before
      Quasimodo.







      The captain halted.







      Meanwhile, Quasimodo had caught up with him, and had boldly grasped his
      horse’s bridle: “Follow me, captain; there is one here who desires to
      speak with you!







      And he laid his hand on the hilt of his dagger.







      Phœbus dealt him a vigorous kick in the breast.







      He re-entered Notre-Dame, lighted his lamp and climbed to the tower again.







      The gypsy was still in the same place, as he had supposed.







      He saw her gesture of wrath, and understood the reproach.







      I know not whether it was done intentionally, but La Esmeralda took the
      faded nosegay and wore it all day long upon her breast.







      That day she did not hear the voice singing in the tower.







      Quasimodo asleep there upon the stones.







      His Jehan, his cherished brother, his spoiled child, came once to his
      door, knocked, swore, entreated, gave his name half a score of times.







      Claude did not open.







       This thought upset him.







      One night, among others, they heated so cruelly his virgin and priestly
      blood, that he bit his pillow, leaped from his bed, flung on a surplice
      over his shirt, and left his cell, lamp in hand, half naked, wild, his
      eyes aflame.







      He knew where to find the key to the red door, which connected the
      cloister with the church, and he always had about him, as the reader
      knows, the key of the staircase leading to the towers.







      A moment later she felt a touch along her body which made her shudder so
      that she straightened herself up in a sitting posture, wide awake and
      furious.







      She tried to scream and could not.







      She seized his bald head by its remnant of hair and tried to thrust aside
      his kisses as though they had been bites.







      She stopped his two arms with superhuman force.







      All at once she felt him stronger than herself.







      In a twinkling, the priest was overthrown and a leaden knee rested on his
      breast.







      It was, in fact, Quasimodo’s voice.







      Quasimodo who was the suppliant.







      The priest, who was overwhelming the deaf man with gestures of wrath and
      reproach, made the latter a violent sign to retire.







      She would certainly have struck him.







      The priest overturned Quasimodo on the floor with a kick, and, quivering
      with rage, darted back under the vault of the staircase.







      When he was gone, Quasimodo picked up the whistle which had just saved the
      gypsy.







      The priest had groped his way back to his cell.







      BOOK TENTH.







      Dom Claude was one of those solemn and impassioned men, a meeting with
      whom always upsets the equilibrium of a sceptical philosopher.







      The priest began to smile with that bitter smile which raises only one
      corner of the mouth.







      Gringoire tossed his head.







      The priest, in an instant, became cold and calm again.







      Gringoire smote his brow in his turn.







      Gringoire began to seek fresh expedients.







      This made the priest’s hollow eye flash.







      The priest was not listening to him!







      At Dom Claude’s proposition, the open and benign face of the poet had
      abruptly clouded over, like a smiling Italian landscape, when an unlucky
      squall comes up and dashes a cloud across the sun.







      The archdeacon spoke imperiously.







      This gesture recalled Gringoire to reality.







      Gringoire was radiant.







      He broke off.







      On re-entering the cloister, the archdeacon found at the door of his cell
      his brother Jehan du Moulin, who was waiting for him, and who had beguiled
      the tedium of waiting by drawing on the wall with a bit of charcoal, a
      profile of his elder brother, enriched with a monstrous nose.







      The archdeacon did not even raise his eyes.







      As he uttered these monstrous words, he assumed the mien of Ajax,
      expecting to see the lightnings descend upon his head.







      Jehan made him a deep bow, and descended the cloister stairs, whistling.







      At the moment when he was passing through the courtyard of the cloister,
      beneath his brother’s window, he heard that window open, raised his eyes
      and beheld the archdeacon’s severe head emerge.







      At the same time, the priest flung Jehan a purse, which gave the scholar a
      big bump on the forehead, and with which Jehan retreated, both vexed and
      content, like a dog who had been stoned with marrow bones.







      Add twenty secondary groups, the waiters, male and female, running
      with jugs on their heads, gamblers squatting over taws, merelles,<a href="#linknote-55" id="linknoteref-55" class="pginternal">[55]</a> dice, vachettes, the ardent game of
      tringlet, quarrels in one corner, kisses in another, and the reader
      will have some idea of this whole picture, over which flickered the
      light of a great, flaming fire, which made a thousand huge and
      grotesque shadows dance over the walls of the drinking shop.







      As for the noise, it was like the inside of a bell at full peal.







      The dripping-pan, where crackled a rain of grease, filled with its
      continual sputtering the intervals of these thousand dialogues, which
      intermingled from one end of the apartment to the other.







      The voice of the young scamp armed from head to foot, dominated the
      uproar.







      Meanwhile, the rabble applauded with shouts of laughter; and seeing that
      the tumult was increasing around him, the scholar cried,—.







      There was a moment of partial silence, during which the sharp voice of the
      Duke of Egypt rose, as he gave instructions to his Bohemians.







      Meanwhile, the vagabonds continued to arm themselves and whisper at the
      other end of the dram-shop.







      Jew.







      Beelzebub, where the hussies comb their heads with the forks!







      In the meantime, Clopin Trouillefou had finished the distribution of arms.







      He approached Gringoire, who appeared to be plunged in a profound revery,
      with his feet on an andiron.







      Gringoire turned to him with a melancholy smile.







      Clopin approached the Duke of Egypt.







      Bohemian.







      Clopin quitted the dram-shop.







      At this word, which produced the effect of the call to boot and saddle on
      a regiment at a halt, all the outcasts, men, women, children, rushed in a
      mass from the tavern, with great noise of arms and old iron implements.







      The moon was obscured.







      Ten minutes later, the cavaliers of the watch fled in terror before a long
      procession of black and silent men which was descending towards the Pont
      au Change, through the tortuous streets which pierce the close-built
      neighborhood of the markets in every direction.







      All at once, while he was scrutinizing the great city with that eye which
      nature, by a sort of compensation, had made so piercing that it could
      almost supply the other organs which Quasimodo lacked, it seemed to him
      that there was something singular about the Quay de la Vieille-Pelleterie,
      that there was a movement at that point, that the line of the parapet,
      standing out blackly against the whiteness of the water was not straight
      and tranquil, like that of the other quays, but that it undulated to the
      eye, like the waves of a river, or like the heads of a crowd in motion.







      An enterprise like that which the vagabonds were now undertaking against
      Notre-Dame was not a very rare thing in the cities of the Middle Ages.







      To-day, barely its church remains.







      Let us return to Notre-Dame.







      When the first arrangements were completed, and we must say, to the honor
      of vagabond discipline, that Clopin’s orders were executed in silence, and
      with admirable precision, the worthy chief of the band, mounted on the
      parapet of the church square, and raised his hoarse and surly voice,
      turning towards Notre-Dame, and brandishing his torch whose light, tossed
      by the wind, and veiled every moment by its own smoke, made the reddish
      façade of the church appear and disappear before the eye.







      Thirty bold men, square shouldered, and with pick-lock faces, stepped from
      the ranks, with hammers, pincers, and bars of iron on their shoulders.







      It is impossible to describe the astonishment mingled with fright which
      fell upon the ruffians in company with this beam.







      They remained for several minutes with their eyes in the air, more
      dismayed by that piece of wood than by the king’s twenty thousand archers.







      Chanteprune.







      The King of Thunes, his first amazement passed, finally found an
      explanation which appeared plausible to his companions.







      At this detonation, the peaceable inhabitants of the surrounding houses
      woke up; many windows were seen to open, and nightcaps and hands holding
      candles appeared at the casements.







      No one took a step.







      At the shock of the beam, the half metallic door sounded like an immense
      drum; it was not burst in, but the whole cathedral trembled, and the
      deepest cavities of the edifice were heard to echo.







      At the same moment, a shower of large stones began to fall from the top of
      the façade on the assailants.







      But the impulse had been given, the King of Thunes had set the example.







      Evidently, the bishop was defending himself, and they only battered the
      door with the more rage, in spite of the stones which cracked skulls right
      and left.







      The reader has no doubt divined that this unexpected resistance which had
      exasperated the outcasts came from Quasimodo.







      Chance had, unfortunately, favored the brave deaf man.







      Thus, as soon as they began to batter the grand door, the shower of rough
      blocks of stone began to fall, and it seemed to them that the church
      itself was being demolished over their heads.







      Fortunately for Quasimodo, there was more iron than wood.







      His shower of stone blocks was not sufficient to repel the assailants.







      Without doubt, this strange beacon light would awaken far away, the
      woodcutter of the hills of Bicêtre, terrified to behold the gigantic
      shadow of the towers of Notre-Dame quivering over his heaths.







      A terrified silence ensued among the outcasts, during which nothing was
      heard, but the cries of alarm of the canons shut up in their cloister, and
      more uneasy than horses in a burning stable, the furtive sound of windows
      hastily opened and still more hastily closed, the internal hurly-burly of
      the houses and of the Hôtel-Dieu, the wind in the flame, the last
      death-rattle of the dying, and the continued crackling of the rain of lead
      upon the pavement.







      In the meanwhile, the principal vagabonds had retired beneath the porch of
      the Gondelaurier mansion, and were holding a council of war.







      Spicali.







      Andry the Red laughed in an idiotic way: “Notre-Dame is making work for
      the hospital,” said he.







      Thunes, stamping his foot.







      The Duke of Egypt pointed sadly to the two streams of boiling lead which
      did not cease to streak the black façade, like two long distaffs of
      phosphorus.







      Mathias Hungadi shook his head.







      It was, in fact, Jehan, who was running as fast as his heavy outfit of a
      Paladin, and a long ladder which trailed on the pavement, would permit,
      more breathless than an ant harnessed to a blade of grass twenty times
      longer than itself.







      Clopin approached him.







      Jehan maintained his right, and was the first to set foot on the rungs.







      Jehan prepared himself for a rough shock, but the deaf man remained
      motionless; only he had turned towards the scholar and was looking at him.







      As he spoke thus, the young scamp stealthily adjusted his crossbow.







      The arrow broken, Quasimodo breathing heavily, bounded like a
      grasshopper, and he fell upon the scholar, whose armor was flattened
      against the wall by the blow.







      Then in that gloom, wherein wavered the light of the torches, a terrible
      thing was seen.







      A cry of horror rose among the vagabonds.







      There was only one window, a long pointed casement, latticed with brass
      wire and bars of iron, further darkened by fine colored panes with the
      arms of the king and of the queen, each pane being worth two and twenty
      sols.







      He was standing bareheaded, a long roll of parchment in his hand, behind
      the arm-chair in which was seated, his body ungracefully doubled up, his
      knees crossed, his elbow on the table, a very badly accoutred personage.







      All were uncovered except the king.







      Flemings were whispering together.







      Rym replied by a negative gesture, accompanied by a discreet smile.







      The person whom he designated by this name, took the papers into his hands
      again, and began to read aloud,—
    </p>
<p>
      “To Adam Tenon, clerk of the warden of the seals of the provostship of
      Paris; for the silver, making, and engraving of said seals, which have
      been made new because the others preceding, by reason of their antiquity
      and their worn condition, could no longer be successfully used, twelve
      livres parisis.







      February, and March of this year; and for this he hath given seven
      sextiers of barley.







      Olivier made a mark with his thumb against the article of the “rascally
      foot soldier,” and passed on.







      Then he rose, leaned on the arm of his interlocutor, made a sign to the
      sort of mute who stood before the door to precede him, to the two Flemings
      to follow him, and quitted the room.







      The royal company was recruited, at the door of the retreat, by men of
      arms, all loaded down with iron, and by slender pages bearing flambeaux.







      The king began to walk slowly round the little edifice, examining it
      carefully, while Master Olivier, who followed him, read aloud the note.







      The voice began to moan again.







      The voice also continued.







      He tore the book from Master Olivier’s hands, and set to reckoning it
      himself upon his fingers, examining the paper and the cage alternately.







      At the expiration of a few moments, the door of the retreat had opened
      again, then closed upon the five personages whom the reader has seen at
      the beginning of this chapter, and who resumed their places, their
      whispered conversations, and their attitudes.







      Guillaume Rym was on the watch.







      The new comer understood, and began in a low tone to give a very terrified
      account, to which the king listened calmly, while Guillaume Rym called
      Coppenole’s attention to the face and dress of the new arrival, to his
      furred cowl, (<i>caputia fourrata</i>), his short cape, (<i>epitogia curta</i>),
      his robe of black velvet, which bespoke a president of the court of
      accounts.







      Hardly had this personage given the king some explanations, when Louis XI.







      Gossip Coictier was struck dumb with surprise.







      The outcast stared at the king, and swung his arms with a stupid air.







      He had one of those awkwardly shaped heads where intelligence is about as
      much at its ease as a light beneath an extinguisher.







      A soldier pointed out to the king a billhook which he had seized on the
      person of the vagabond.







      This was the first word that he had uttered.







      Gringoire fell backwards, quite thunderstruck with joy.







      Coictier took the king’s hand, and begun to feel of his pulse with a
      knowing air.







      These words, uttered with severity, made Master Olivier’s face revert to
      its insolence.







      Accordingly, Olivier le Mauvais remained motionless, sulking at the king,
      and glancing askance at Jacques Coictier.







      Olivier perceiving that the king had made up his mind to laugh, and that
      there was no way of even annoying him, went off grumbling to execute his
      orders.







      The two men of Ghent drew near.







      The hosier, in spite of the signs made to him by Guillaume Rym, appeared
      determined to hold his own against the king.







      Coppenole, with his tranquil and rustic countenance, made the king
      approach the window.







      Demoiselle of Flanders wishes to save her ministers, the grand bailiff is
      doubling the impost on shagreen, or something else,’—what you will.







      Olivier opened his mouth to reply.







      This question caused the king to meditate.







      The personage in black rose.







      Both descended towards the city with long strides.







      The frightened vagabonds wheeled round.







      Quasimodo who did not hear, saw the naked swords, the torches, the irons
      of the pikes, all that cavalry, at the head of which he recognized Captain
      Phœbus; he beheld the confusion of the outcasts, the terror of some, the
      disturbance among the bravest of them, and from this unexpected succor he
      recovered so much strength, that he hurled from the church the first
      assailants who were already climbing into the gallery.







      Parvis, driven to bay against Notre-Dame, which they still assailed and
      Quasimodo defended, at the same time besiegers and besieged, they were in
      the singular situation in which Comte Henri Harcourt, <i>Taurinum obsessor
      idem et obsessus</i>, as his epitaph says, found himself later on, at the
      famous siege of Turin, in 1640, between Prince Thomas of Savoy, whom he
      was besieging, and the Marquis de Leganez, who was blockading him.







      Hôtel-Dieu with some wan invalids gazing down from the heights of its roof
      all checkered with dormer windows.







      When he entered the cell, he found it empty.







      BOOK ELEVENTH.







      La Esmeralda was sleeping at the moment when the outcasts assailed the
      church.







      She remained thus prostrate for a very long time, trembling in truth, more
      than praying, chilled by the ever-closer breath of that furious multitude,
      understanding nothing of this outburst, ignorant of what was being
      plotted, what was being done, what they wanted, but foreseeing a terrible
      issue.







      Gringoire rose.







      The goat followed them, frisking, so joyous at seeing Gringoire again that
      it made him stumble every moment by thrusting its horns between his legs.







      The man with the lantern walked straight to the point of the Terrain.







      When our philosopher felt the boat sway, he clapped his hands and kissed
      Djali between the horns.







      Foin.







      But it seemed to her as though she were descending a slope.







      The man halted, turned towards her and raised his cowl.







      As he went with hurried step and made her hurry also, for he did not
      release her, he walked straight to the gallows, and pointed to it with his
      finger,—
    </p>
<p>
      “Choose between us two,” he said, coldly.







      Then he allowed his arm to sink slowly, and gazed at the pavement in
      profound dejection.







      I may let all go to destruction, and that there is beneath us a bottomless
      abyss, unhappy girl, whither my fall will follow yours to all eternity!







      The priest clasped her in his arms with fury, and began to laugh with an
      abominable laugh.







      Tour-Roland, dragging her after him along the pavement by her beautiful
      hands.







      She turned a dying look towards the window, and she beheld the fierce face
      of the sacked nun through the bars.







      The unhappy Esmeralda dropped her head beneath her flowing hair,
      comprehending that it was no human being she had to deal with.







      Again the young girl fell; exhausted, broken, and having already the
      glassy eye of a person in the grave.







      And at the same time, with her hand which was at liberty, she quickly
      opened the little bag ornamented with green glass, which she wore about
      her neck.







      When her daughter was inside the cell, she laid her gently on the ground,
      then raised her up again, and bearing her in her arms as though she were
      still only her little Agnès, she walked to and fro in her little room,
      intoxicated, frantic, joyous, crying out, singing, kissing her daughter,
      talking to her, bursting into laughter, melting into tears, all at once
      and with vehemence.







      The sacked nun again pressed her daughter in her arms.







      She thrust her head through the window, and withdrew it again hastily.







      At that name, at that voice, la Esmeralda, crouching in her corner, made a
      movement.







      The commander dismounted, and came toward her.







      This question brought anguish again to the heart of the miserable mother.







      Nevertheless, she did not lose all presence of mind.







      Tristan cast a sidelong glance at the recluse.







      Always and everywhere people are to be found who have seen everything.







      This unexpected testimony from the archer re-encouraged the recluse, whom
      this interrogatory was forcing to cross an abyss on the edge of a knife.







      But she was condemned to a perpetual alternative of hope and alarm.







      She seized on these words with avidity.







      Rennet Cousin approached her cell, she showed him so savage a face that he
      shrank back.







      The executioner observed the mother’s finger-nails and dared not.







      She looked at him like one who does not understand.







      The wretched woman began to laugh in her wild way.







      The tone in which she pronounced these words made even Henriet Cousin
      shudder.







      Rat-Hole, stared at it with an air of astonishment and passed on.







      She threw herself upon it, she tried to hold it back; she scratched the
      stone with her nails, but the massive block, set in movement by six men,
      escaped her and glided gently to the ground along the iron levers.







      The mother gazed at the soldiers in such formidable fashion that they were
      more inclined to retreat than to advance.







      No one took a step.







      Placed between the provost and the mother, both threatening, the soldiers
      hesitated for a moment, then took their resolution, and advanced towards
      the Rat-Hole.







      At the same time she began to speak, but in a voice so supplicating, so
      gentle, so submissive, so heartrending, that more than one old
      convict-warder around Tristan who must have devoured human flesh wiped his
      eyes.







      Rennet Cousin paused at the foot of the fatal ladder, with that which he
      was dragging, and, barely breathing, with so much pity did the thing
      inspire him, he passed the rope around the lovely neck of the young girl.







      The executioner, who had not loosed his hold on the young girl, began to
      ascend the ladder once more.







      As he approached it, he fancied that he might, perhaps, find her there.







      At length he summoned up courage, advanced on tiptoe, looked, entered.







      He reflected that the archdeacon had done this thing, and the wrath of
      blood and death which it would have evoked in him against any other
      person, turned in the poor deaf man, from the moment when Claude Frollo
      was in question, into an increase of grief and sorrow.







      Quasimodo rose and followed the archdeacon.







      Notre-Dame.







      Quasimodo, advancing with the tread of a wolf behind him, went to see what
      he was gazing at thus.







      The priest’s attention was so absorbed elsewhere that he did not hear the
      deaf man walking behind him.







      Outside the balustrade of the tower, directly under the point where the
      priest had paused, there was one of those fantastically carved stone
      gutters with which Gothic edifices bristle, and, in a crevice of that
      gutter, two pretty wallflowers in blossom, shaken out and vivified, as it
      were, by the breath of air, made frolicsome salutations to each other.







      Above the towers, on high, far away in the depths of the sky, the cries of
      little birds were heard.







      Grève.







      It was she.







      At the moment when it was most horrible, the laugh of a demon, a laugh
      which one can only give vent to when one is no longer human, burst forth
      on the priest’s livid face.







      Quasimodo did not hear that laugh, but he saw it.







      The bellringer retreated several paces behind the archdeacon, and suddenly
      hurling himself upon him with fury, with his huge hands he pushed him by
      the back over into the abyss over which Dom Claude was leaning.







      Quasimodo thrust over the edge of the balustrade above his head.







      Then he was silent.







      The deaf man was leaning, with his elbows on the balustrade, at the spot
      where the archdeacon had been a moment before, and there, never detaching
      his gaze from the only object which existed for him in the world at that
      moment, he remained motionless and mute, like a man struck by lightning,
      and a long stream of tears flowed in silence from that eye which, up to
      that time, had never shed but one tear.







      Quasimodo wept and gazed at the Grève.







      Quasimodo wept.







      Quasimodo watched him fall.







      Towards evening on that day, when the judiciary officers of the bishop
      came to pick up from the pavement of the Parvis the dislocated corpse of
      the archdeacon, Quasimodo had disappeared.







      This is why the archdeacon was not interred in consecrated earth.







      During the night which followed the execution of la Esmeralda, the night
      men had detached her body from the gibbet, and had carried it, according
      to custom, to the cellar of Montfaucon.







      Martin, about a hundred and sixty toises from the walls of Paris, a few
      bow shots from La Courtille, there was to be seen on the crest of a
      gentle, almost imperceptible eminence, but sufficiently elevated to be
      seen for several leagues round about, an edifice of strange form, bearing
      considerable resemblance to a Celtic cromlech, and where also human
      sacrifices were offered.







      Let the reader picture to himself, crowning a limestone hillock, an oblong
      mass of masonry fifteen feet in height, thirty wide, forty long, with a
      gate, an external railing and a platform; on this platform sixteen
      enormous pillars of rough hewn stone, thirty feet in height, arranged in a
      colonnade round three of the four sides of the mass which support them,
      bound together at their summits by heavy beams, whence hung chains at
      intervals; on all these chains, skeletons; in the vicinity, on the plain,
      a stone cross and two gibbets of secondary importance, which seemed to
      have sprung up as shoots around the central gallows; above all this, in
      the sky, a perpetual flock of crows; that was Montfaucon.







      As for the mysterious disappearance of Quasimodo, this is all that we have
      been able to discover.







      About eighteen months or two years after the events which terminate this
      story, when search was made in that cavern for the body of Olivier le
      Daim, who had been hanged two days previously, and to whom Charles VIII.







      NOTE<br>
      ADDED TO THE DEFINITIVE EDITION.







      Now the chapters have been found, and he avails himself of the first
      opportunity to restore them to their place.







      This now, is his entire work, such as he dreamed it, such as he made it,
      good or bad, durable or fragile, but such as he wishes it.







      For such people especially, the chapters added to this edition will
      complete “Notre-Dame-de-Paris,” if we admit that
      “Notre-Dame-de-Paris” was worth the trouble of completing.







      But, in any case, whatever may be the future of architecture, in whatever
      manner our young architects may one day solve the question of their art,
      let us, while waiting for new monument, preserve the ancient monuments.







      Tuileries, one of them is giving Philibert Delorme a scar across the
      middle of his face; and it is not, assuredly, one of the least of the
      scandals of our time to see with what effrontery the heavy architecture of
      this gentleman is being flattened over one of the most delicate façades of
      the Renaissance!







      PARIS, October 20, 1832.







      FOOTNOTES:
    </h2>
<p>
<a id="linknote-1"></a>
</p>
<p class="footnote">
1 (<a href="#linknoteref-1" class="pginternal">return</a>)<br> The word Gothic, in the sense in
which it is generally employed, is wholly unsuitable, but wholly consecrated.







Hence we accept it and we adopt it, like all the rest of the world, to
characterize the architecture of the second half of the Middle Ages, where the
ogive is the principle which succeeds the architecture of the first period, of
which the semi-circle is the father.







A coffer of great richness<br>
    In a pillar’s heart they found,<br>
Within it lay new banners,<br>
    With figures to astound.







My mother is a bird,<br>
my father is a bird.







Non diversa tamen, qualem</i>, etc.







Their faces not all alike, nor yet different, but such as the faces of sisters
ought to be.







Calixtus, uncle of Borgia, ordered public prayers, is the same which reappeared
in 1835.







Carreaux let themselves be hung like calves.







Marafin plundered it.







France, containing six feet and nearly five inches English measure.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.