Hindhead,<br>
    Haslemere.







      Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no sign of my
      occupation.







      I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his settee and
      blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.







      Holmes with some asperity.







        Barrymore, the husband acting as butler and the wife as housekeeper.







      Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee with an impatient
      gesture.







      Holmes considered for a little time.







      Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of inward satisfaction
      which meant that he had a congenial task before him.







      Northumberland Hotel,” was printed in rough characters; the post-mark
      “Charing Cross,” and the date of posting the preceding evening.







        As you value your life or your reason keep away from the moor.







      The word “moor” only was printed in ink.







      Sir Henry Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dark eyes upon me.







      Mortimer.







      Cross until we found the remains of the mutilated <i>Times</i> leader we could
      lay our hands straight upon the person who sent this singular message.







      He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words were pasted,
      holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.







      Baskerville listened with the deepest attention and with an occasional
      exclamation of surprise.







      Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about two hundred yards ahead
      of us in the direction of Oxford Street.







      He turned into one of the district messenger offices, where he was warmly
      greeted by the manager.







      The book showed that two names had been added after that of Baskerville.







      One was Theophilus Johnson and family, of Newcastle; the other Mrs.







      Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.







      Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning.







      An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene.







      The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had time to
      answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it heartily.







      The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I was
      complimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with which the
      baronet hailed me as a companion.







      We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry of triumph, and diving
      into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown boot from under a
      cabinet.







      The ring at the bell proved to be something even more satisfactory than an
      answer, however, for the door opened and a rough-looking fellow entered
      who was evidently the man himself.







      Sherlock Holmes made a note of it.







      Then the two gentlemen passed us, walking, and we followed down Baker
      Street and along—”
     </p>
<p>
      “I know,” said Holmes.







      John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a shrug of
      his shoulders and a rueful smile.







      Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and were waiting
      for us upon the platform.







      I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind and saw the
      tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazing after us.







      The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in making the
      more intimate acquaintance of my two companions and in playing with Dr.







      The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all descended.







      Its master had risen and was staring with flushed cheeks and shining eyes.







      The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face.







      I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gazed about him.







      I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon the butler’s white face.







      Obviously the first thing to do was to see the Grimpen postmaster and find
      whether the test telegram had really been placed in Barrymore’s own hands.







      Be the answer what it might, I should at least have something to report to
      Sherlock Holmes.







      The words took away my breath for an instant but a glance at the placid
      face and steadfast eyes of my companion showed that no surprise was
      intended.







      The whole steep slope was covered with grey circular rings of stone, a
      score of them at least.







      Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to us breathing hard and
      flushed with his exertions.







      An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her face, but her
      eyes had hardened again when she answered me.







      One page is missing, but otherwise they are exactly as written and show my
      feelings and suspicions of the moment more accurately than my memory,
      clear as it is upon these tragic events, can possibly do.







      Baskerville Hall, October 13th.







      MY DEAR HOLMES,
    </p>
<p>
      My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as
      to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of the world.







      Sir Henry and I were concerned at their situation, and it was suggested
      that Perkins the groom should go over to sleep there, but Stapleton would
      not hear of it.







      Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time.







      In the evening he recurred to the subject of his own accord.







      Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by giving
      him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London outfit having now
      all arrived.







      I have always felt that there was something singular and questionable in
      this man’s character, but the adventure of last night brings all my
      suspicions to a head.







      But I will tell you all and you shall judge for yourself.







      He was less surprised than I had expected.







      Sir Henry put his hand upon my shoulder with a pleasant smile.







      I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing anything of
      Sir Henry, until I came to the point where the moor path branches off.







      Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died away in the distance.







      The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his hands together
      like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and misery.







      A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candle from the trembling
      hand of the butler.







      I gave a cry of exultation, for a tiny pinpoint of yellow light had
      suddenly transfixed the dark veil, and glowed steadily in the centre of
      the black square framed by the window.







      The woman’s words came with an intense earnestness which carried
      conviction with them.







      Henry so keen upon the adventure.







      My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voice which
      told of the sudden horror which had seized him.







      I hesitated but could not escape the question.







      He groaned and was silent for a few moments.







      It was as cold as a block of marble.







      The butler was standing very pale but very collected before us.







      With a few broken words of gratitude the man turned, but he hesitated and
      then came back.







      Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his little dog again.







      He thought for a few minutes.







      I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips and stared at Barrymore.







      Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his outburst or found
      it difficult to express his own feelings in words.







      I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I had learned about Mrs.







      Sir Henry behind, therefore, not without some prickings of conscience, and
      drove off upon my new quest.







      The freckles started out on the lady’s face.







      The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes.







      She met my difficulty with the utmost readiness.







      I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton his almoner
      upon several occasions, so the lady’s statement bore the impress of truth
      upon it.







      I thought that she had fainted, but she recovered herself by a supreme
      effort.







      Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I could never get past that
      point.







      Then I followed Frankland into his dining-room.







      The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the old autocrat.







      His eyes looked malignantly at me, and his grey whiskers bristled like
      those of an angry cat.







      It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark dot
      against the dull green and grey.







      At last my foot was on the threshold of his hiding place—his secret
      was within my grasp.







      Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket.







      The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed, loomed
      through the darkness which had girt me so long.







      The darkness was rising, but much was still hidden by the shadows.







       I asked.







      Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outline at the
      door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrust forward, his face
      peering into the darkness.







      And it shone upon something else which turned our hearts sick and faint
      within us—the body of Sir Henry Baskerville!







      Holmes shrugged his shoulders.







      Looking back we saw the figure moving slowly away over the broad moor, and
      behind him that one black smudge on the silvered slope which showed where
      the man was lying who had come so horribly to his end.







      I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked, lost in thought, as
      far as the Baskerville gates.







      I gazed with interest and some surprise upon the portrait.







      The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the canvas.







      I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afoot earlier still, for I
      saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.







      The baronet’s face perceptibly lengthened.







      I saw by the baronet’s clouded brow that he was deeply hurt by what he
      regarded as our desertion.







      Watson will leave his things as a pledge that he will come back to you.







      Lestrade.







      The lady sprang from her chair.







      Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.







      The fierce flash of her eyes said more than any words.







      She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with the set, rigid face of
      a desperate woman.







      She hesitated and looked down.







      We did not drive up to the door but got down near the gate of the avenue.







      The wagonette was paid off and ordered to return to Coombe Tracey
      forthwith, while we started to walk to Merripit House.







      We moved cautiously along the track as if we were bound for the house, but
      Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards from it.







      So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we were half
      a mile from the house, and still that dense white sea, with the moon
      silvering its upper edge, swept slowly and inexorably on.







      The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room to room to
      the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us in the passage.







      She opened her eyes again.







      She gave a long sigh of satisfaction.







      The two of them were destined to travel together round the world before
      Sir Henry had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had been
      before he became master of that ill-omened estate.







      And now I come rapidly to the conclusion of this singular narrative, in
      which I have tried to make the reader share those dark fears and vague
      surmises which clouded our lives so long and ended in so tragic a manner.







      Toronto,” was printed on the leather inside.







      Garcia, one of the beauties of Costa Rica, and, having purloined a
      considerable sum of public money, he changed his name to Vandeleur and
      fled to England, where he established a school in the east of Yorkshire.







      His reason for attempting this special line of business was that he had
      struck up an acquaintance with a consumptive tutor upon the voyage home,
      and that he had used this man’s ability to make the undertaking a success.







      Stapleton herself, spoke good English, but with a curious lisping accent.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.