Petersburgh and Archangel.







Archangel, 28th March, 17—.







I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking.







July 7th, 17—.







No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter.







One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which
experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and I shall be well content
if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.







Heaven bless my beloved sister!







August 5th, 17—.







So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear recording it,
although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come
into your possession.







I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend on
the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken
by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of my
heart.







I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should I have
any fresh incidents to record.







August 13th, 17—.







Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of
grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours
of repose and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his composure.







August 19th, 17—.







I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one that may direct
you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of failure.







There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this
circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection.







We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages.







I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute.







Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem
the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.







But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more.







Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I
could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any
but a violent death!







Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity.







It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution,
happiness with their disregard.







Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.







Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.







As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid.







Pursuing these reflections, I thought that if I could bestow animation upon
lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it
impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to
corruption.







But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale, and
your looks remind me to proceed.







I was attacked by the fatal passion.







I dared not even think?







Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion.







At other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments,
which he supported with great ingenuity.







Ernest came, and enquired if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had been
playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly
sought for him, and afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not
return.







William!







We passed a few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to commence.







Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was desired to plead, she
collected her powers and spoke in an audible although variable voice.







The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence,
but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.







Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.







We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw
at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees.







Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I
beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine,
the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.







Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to
look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather
promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which
hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe.







Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared to me.







Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding <i>aiguilles</i>, and its tremendous
<i>dôme</i> overlooked the valley.







Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;<br>
    Nought may endure but mutability!







My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which
can arm one being against the existence of another.







I found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the
blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.







An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast.







Presently I saw the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the
field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house
and sometimes in the yard.







They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially
the two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
man when they reserved none for themselves.







The stranger learned about twenty words at the first lesson; most of them,
indeed, were those which I had before understood, but I profited by the others.







Paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue,
refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could
afford.







I shall only have time to repeat the substance of them to you.







Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable opportunity of
passing into some part of the Turkish dominions.







But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I must not omit a
circumstance which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same
year.







I wept, without precisely understanding it.







Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s
experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more
months should have added to my sagacity.







The fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination I approached the door
of their cottage.







The inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe
the agony of this suspense.







I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and after having
destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I waited with forced
impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.







But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined
to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that
wore the human form.







The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away
while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he said this I
could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me.







These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you how the
eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to every
blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me.







It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native country.







Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to post
the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the river
was too gentle to aid us.







Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had heard of even in my country.







Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred
society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous works
with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.







We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now February.







We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland and
conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period of our
appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel on.







Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh
water, was to be procured from the mainland, which was about five miles
distant.







In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived, but as I
proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me.







Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several
days, and at other times I toiled day and night in order to complete my work.







In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced.







I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared
not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings
of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom.







Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself
in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my
progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise.







I awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself,
and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still
the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a
dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.







The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; it
contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him.







Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for
several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to
my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.







While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase.







I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the
frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
recollection.







The son confirmed his father’s account, but when Daniel Nugent was called he
swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat,
with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore; and as far as he
could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had
just landed.







A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of
her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she
heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with only one man in it
push off from that part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found.







Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone.







The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I was
carried out of the room in strong convulsions.







Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to
affright the other witnesses.







I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had forgotten the particulars
of what had happened and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly
overwhelmed me; but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the
squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory and I
groaned bitterly.







I had heard during my sufferings.







My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my desponding
spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness.







The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be
endured in my weak state; I shed tears.







Then the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present to
my thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for
some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.







Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the
dark orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as I first saw
them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.







Ever since my recovery from the fever, I had been in the custom of taking every
night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug only that
I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of life.







In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned to Geneva.







She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before
charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit
companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.







Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth.







I remained silent.







She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a
little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared
certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and
leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.







It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the shore,
enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the
lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still
displaying their black outlines.







Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.







I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how fearful
the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly
entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some
knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.







She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages of the
house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary.







This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed
into the room.







Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect on
the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my
release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town and told him that I had an
accusation to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family, and that I required
him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.







The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I continued he
became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes shudder with horror;
at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his
countenance.







This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.







I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some
other mode of action.







I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the
furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.







I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.







I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the Frozen
Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land.







Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might not
intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the
burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept
aloud.







August 26th, 17—.







You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel
your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles mine?







Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes.







He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.







My beloved Sister,
</p>
<p class="right">
September 2d.







September 5th.







A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly
probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording
it.







Frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire still glimmers in
his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he
speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness.







They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn promise that if
the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southwards.







I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary,
but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage would return.







They retired and I turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and
almost deprived of life.







September 7th.







September 12th.







I think right, for I may still be misled by passion.







I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend.







I called on him to stay.







He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless
form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and
gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion.







I shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.