                    CASTLE OF INDOLENCE.







Hollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his being belated, and in a hurry to
get back to the churchyard before daybreak.







Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition, which has furnished
materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows; and the spectre is
known at all the country firesides, by the name of the Headless Horseman of
Sleepy Hollow.







With these he lived successively a week at a time, thus going the rounds of the
neighborhood, with all his worldly effects tied up in a cotton handkerchief.







New England Witchcraft,” in which, by the way, he most firmly and
potently believed.







All these, however, were mere terrors of the night, phantoms of the mind that
walk in darkness; and though he had seen many spectres in his time, and been
more than once beset by Satan in divers shapes, in his lonely perambulations,
yet daylight put an end to all these evils; and he would have passed a pleasant
life of it, in despite of the Devil and all his works, if his path had not been
crossed by a being that causes more perplexity to mortal man than ghosts,
goblins, and the whole race of witches put together, and that was—a
woman.







Tassel was a perfect picture of a thriving, contented, liberal-hearted farmer.







Tennessee,—or the Lord knows where!







Among these, the most formidable was a burly, roaring, roystering blade, of the
name of Abraham, or, according to the Dutch abbreviation, Brom Van Brunt, the
hero of the country round, which rang with his feats of strength and hardihood.







Van Tassel’s paling, on a Sunday night, a sure sign that his master was
courting, or, as it is termed, “sparking,” within, all other
suitors passed by in despair, and carried the war into other quarters.







Sunday nights, and a deadly feud gradually arose between him and the preceptor
of Sleepy Hollow.







Ichabod to attend a merry-making or “quilting frolic,” to be held
that evening at Mynheer Van Tassel’s; and having delivered his message
with that air of importance, and effort at fine language, which a negro is apt
to display on petty embassies of the kind, he dashed over the brook, and was
seen scampering away up the hollow, full of the importance and hurry of his
mission.







Van Ripper, and it was altogether such an apparition as is seldom to be met
with in broad daylight.







Van Tassel.







Ichabod Crane was not in so great a hurry as his historian, but did ample
justice to every dainty.







When the dance was at an end, Ichabod was attracted to a knot of the sager
folks, who, with Old Van Tassel, sat smoking at one end of the piazza,
gossiping over former times, and drawing out long stories about the war.







Headless Horseman, who had been heard several times of late, patrolling the
country; and, it was said, tethered his horse nightly among the graves in the
churchyard.







Horseman returning from his foray into Sleepy Hollow, and was obliged to get up
behind him; how they galloped over bush and brake, over hill and swamp, until
they reached the bridge; when the Horseman suddenly turned into a skeleton,
threw old Brouwer into the brook, and sprang away over the tree-tops with a
clap of thunder.







Something, however, I fear me, must have gone wrong, for he certainly sallied
forth, after no very great interval, with an air quite desolate and chapfallen.







The next morning the old horse was found without his saddle, and with the
bridle under his feet, soberly cropping the grass at his master’s gate.







POSTSCRIPT.







The story-teller, who was just putting a glass of wine to his lips, as a
refreshment after his toils, paused for a moment, looked at his inquirer with
an air of infinite deference, and, lowering the glass slowly to the table,
observed that the story was intended most logically to prove—
</p>
<p>
“That there is no situation in life but has its advantages and
pleasures—provided we will but take a joke as we find it:
</p>
<p>
“That, therefore, he that runs races with goblin troopers is likely to
have rough riding of it.







THE END.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.