County, Massachusetts, where he occupied with his family a small red wooden
house, still standing at the date of this edition, near the Stockbridge Bowl.







January following.







Hawthorne line and its fortunes was followed in the romance, the Pyncheons
taking the place of the author’s family, certain distinguishing marks of
the Hawthornes were assigned to the imaginary Maule posterity.







Hawthorne’s fancy and details of reality are only fragmentary, and are
rearranged to suit the author’s purposes.







L<small>ENOX</small>, January 27, 1851.







The House of the Seven Gables, antique as it now looks, was not the first
habitation erected by civilized man on precisely the same spot of ground.







This person—a gray-headed man, of quiet and most respectful
deportment—found it necessary to explain that his master still remained
in his study, or private apartment; on entering which, an hour before, he had
expressed a wish on no account to be disturbed.







Thus early had that one guest,—the only guest who is certain, at one time
or another, to find his way into every human dwelling,—thus early had
Death stepped across the threshold of the House of the Seven Gables!







In almost every generation, nevertheless, there happened to be some one
descendant of the family gifted with a portion of the hard, keen sense, and
practical energy, that had so remarkably distinguished the original founder.







Latterly, there were rumors (which few believed, and only one or two felt
greatly interested in) that this long-buried man was likely, for some reason or
other, to be summoned forth from his living tomb.







Later, he had engaged in politics, and served a part of two terms in Congress,
besides making a considerable figure in both branches of the State legislature.







And now—in a very humble way, as will be seen—we proceed to open
our narrative.







And yet, her undying faith and trust, her fresh remembrance, and continual
devotedness towards the original of that miniature, have been the only
substance for her heart to feed upon.







Hepzibah Pyncheon was about to do.







Tophet.







And, of all places in the world, why had he chosen the House of the Seven
Gables as the scene of his commercial speculations?







Pyncheon, too irreverently, at the instant of time when the patrician lady is
to be transformed into the plebeian woman.







He met the scowl of old Hepzibah without apparent alarm, as having heretofore
encountered it and found it harmless.







So Hepzibah put forth her lank arm, and, taking the effigy from the
shop-window, delivered it to her first customer.







Hepzibah Pyncheon, a forlorn old maid, and keeper of a cent-shop!







Then, ashamed and penitent, she hid her face.







Midas-like, transmuting them to gold.







Uncle Venner was himself the most ancient existence, whether of man or thing,
in Pyncheon Street, except the House of the Seven Gables, and perhaps the elm
that overshadowed it.







But you,—you’re a young woman yet,—you never need go there!







Pyncheon who had emigrated to Virginia, in some past generation, and became a
great planter there,—hearing of Hepzibah’s destitution, and
impelled by the splendid generosity of character with which their Virginian
mixture must have enriched the New England blood,—would send her a
remittance of a thousand dollars, with a hint of repeating the favor annually.







Or,—and, surely, anything so undeniably just could not be beyond the
limits of reasonable anticipation,—the great claim to the heritage of
Waldo County might finally be decided in favor of the Pyncheons; so that,
instead of keeping a cent-shop, Hepzibah would build a palace, and look down
from its highest tower on hill, dale, forest, field, and town, as her own share
of the ancestral territory.







Instead of pursuing any weightier topic, Uncle Venner was pleased to favor
Hepzibah with some sage counsel in her shop-keeping capacity.







Hepzibah bade her young guest sit down, and, herself taking a chair near by,
looked as earnestly at Phœbe’s trim little figure as if she expected to
see right into its springs and motive secrets.







To Hepzibah’s blunt observation, therefore, Phœbe replied as frankly,
and more cheerfully.







With this measured, but not exactly cold assurance of a hospitable purpose,
Hepzibah kissed her cheek.







The cups—not having been used, perhaps, since Hepzibah’s
youth—had contracted no small burden of dust, which Phœbe washed away
with so much care and delicacy as to satisfy even the proprietor of this
invaluable china.







Hepzibah’s, who had no taste nor spirits for the lady-like employment of
cultivating flowers, and—with her recluse habits, and tendency to shelter
herself within the dismal shadow of the house—would hardly have come
forth under the speck of open sky to weed and hoe among the fraternity of beans
and squashes.







The girl ran into the house to get some crumbs of bread, cold potatoes, and
other such scraps as were suitable to the accommodating appetite of fowls.







The chicken, hereupon, though almost as venerable in appearance as its
mother—possessing, indeed, the whole antiquity of its progenitors in
miniature,—mustered vivacity enough to flutter upward and alight on
Phœbe’s shoulder.







Phœbe.







After a little while, the twilight, deepened by the shadows of the fruit-trees
and the surrounding buildings, threw an obscurity over the garden.







She set the lighted lamp in the passage, and again entered the parlor.







Hepzibah had no natural turn for cookery, and, to say the truth, had fairly
incurred her present meagreness by often choosing to go without her dinner
rather than be attendant on the rotation of the spit, or ebullition of the pot.







But the Puritan’s face scowled down out of the picture, as if nothing on
the table pleased his appetite.







At last, when their mutual labor was all finished, she took Phœbe’s hand
in her own trembling one.







Thus murmuring in an undertone, as if speaking rather to her own heart than to
Phœbe, the old gentlewoman stepped on tiptoe about the room, making such
arrangements as suggested themselves at the crisis.







Hepzibah’s voice!







He smiled to himself, and threw a glance of fine sarcastic meaning towards
Hepzibah.







And then the unnerved man—he that had been born for enjoyment, but had
met a doom so very wretched—burst into a woman’s passion of tears.







Finally, his chair being deep and softly cushioned, Clifford fell asleep.







After partly closing the door, the child turned back, and mumbled something to
Phœbe, which, as the whale was but half disposed of, she could not perfectly
understand.







Phœbe continued to gaze at him, without answering his mother’s message,
he took his departure.







But, as it happened, scarcely had Phœbe’s eyes rested again on the
Judge’s countenance than all its ugly sternness vanished; and she found
herself quite overpowered by the sultry, dog-day heat, as it were, of
benevolence, which this excellent man diffused out of his great heart into the
surrounding atmosphere,—very much like a serpent, which, as a preliminary
to fascination, is said to fill the air with his peculiar odor.







Pyncheon’s marital deportment,—that the lady got her death-blow in
the honeymoon, and never smiled again, because her husband compelled her to
serve him with coffee every morning at his bedside, in token of fealty to her
liege-lord and master.







Scarcely any of the items in the above-drawn parallel occurred to Phœbe, whose
country birth and residence, in truth, had left her pitifully ignorant of most
of the family traditions, which lingered, like cobwebs and incrustations of
smoke, about the rooms and chimney-corners of the House of the Seven Gables.







Phœbe heard a certain noise in Judge Pyncheon’s throat,—rather
habitual with him, not altogether voluntary, yet indicative of nothing, unless
it were a slight bronchial complaint, or, as some people hinted, an apoplectic
symptom,—when the girl heard this queer and awkward ingurgitation (which
the writer never did hear, and therefore cannot describe), she very foolishly
started, and clasped her hands.







But the Judge showed a singular determination to enter unannounced; and as
Phœbe, with the vivacity of a person whose movements unconsciously answer to
her thoughts, had stepped towards the door, he used little or no ceremony in
putting her aside.







Hepzibah on the spot, as if she were a figure of yellow wax.







Judge, whose sensibility, it seems, was hurt by the coldness of the phrase.







Pyncheon’s kindly aspect, that (such, at least, was the rumor about town)
an extra passage of the water-carts was found essential, in order to lay the
dust occasioned by so much extra sunshine!







No sooner had he disappeared than Hepzibah grew deadly white, and, staggering
towards Phœbe, let her head fall on the young girl’s shoulder.







But the worst of all—the hardest stroke of fate for Hepzibah to endure,
and perhaps for Clifford, too was his invincible distaste for her appearance.







Her features, never the most agreeable, and now harsh with age and grief, and
resentment against the world for his sake; her dress, and especially her
turban; the queer and quaint manners, which had unconsciously grown upon her in
solitude,—such being the poor gentlewoman’s outward
characteristics, it is no great marvel, although the mournfullest of pities,
that the instinctive lover of the Beautiful was fain to turn away his eyes.







Phœbe’s voice and song, moreover, came sifted through the golden texture
of a cheery spirit, and was somehow so interfused with the quality thence
acquired, that one’s heart felt all the lighter for having wept at it.







And then, while the yellow richness of the declining sunshine still fell into
the open space of the garden, Phœbe brought out a loaf of bread and a china
bowl of currants, freshly gathered from the bushes, and crushed with sugar.







Venner, as a mark of friendship and approbation, he readily consented to afford
the young man his countenance in the way of his profession,—not
metaphorically, be it understood, but literally, by allowing a daguerreotype of
his face, so familiar to the town, to be exhibited at the entrance of
Holgrave’s studio.







He sometimes made doleful complaint that there were no stage-coaches nowadays.







Pyncheon Street was sometimes enlivened by spectacles of more imposing
pretensions than the above, and which brought the multitude along with them.







The girl waved her hand to Hepzibah and Clifford, and went up the street; a
religion in herself, warm, simple, true, with a substance that could walk on
earth, and a spirit that was capable of heaven.







Their hearts quaked within them at the idea of taking one step farther.







Hepzibah, piquing herself on a woman’s accuracy in such matters, held it
to be slightly different from what Clifford described; but, producing the very
gown from an old trunk, it proved to be identical with his remembrance of it.







It was curious to see how the passers-by regarded these brilliant fantasies, as
they came floating down, and made the dull atmosphere imaginative about them.







The Daguerreotypist</h2>
<p>
It must not be supposed that the life of a personage naturally so active as
Phœbe could be wholly confined within the precincts of the old Pyncheon House.







Always, in his interviews with Phœbe, the artist made especial inquiry as to
the welfare of Clifford, whom, except at the Sunday festival, he seldom saw.







Holgrave,—as doubtless it has seemed to the hopeful of every century
since the epoch of Adam’s grandchildren,—that in this age, more
than ever before, the moss-grown and rotten Past is to be torn down, and
lifeless institutions to be thrust out of the way, and their dead corpses
buried, and everything to begin anew.







He would still have faith in man’s brightening destiny, and perhaps love
him all the better, as he should recognize his helplessness in his own behalf;
and the haughty faith, with which he began life, would be well bartered for a
far humbler one at its close, in discerning that man’s best directed
effort accomplishes a kind of dream, while God is the sole worker of realities.







As this latter point was one which the daguerreotypist could not decide for
himself, he forthwith produced his roll of manuscript, and, while the late
sunbeams gilded the seven gables, began to read.







Alice Pyncheon</h2>
<p>
There was a message brought, one day, from the worshipful Gervayse Pyncheon to
young Matthew Maule, the carpenter, desiring his immediate presence at the
House of the Seven Gables.







There was a vertical sundial on the front gable; and as the carpenter passed
beneath it, he looked up and noted the hour.







Black Scipio answered the summons in a prodigious hurry; but showed the whites
of his eyes, in amazement on beholding only the carpenter.







As he stept into the house, a note of sweet and melancholy music thrilled and
vibrated along the passage-way, proceeding from one of the rooms above stairs.







She was of foreign education, and could not take kindly to the New England
modes of life, in which nothing beautiful had ever been developed.







Certain papers belonging to Colonel Pyncheon, as his grandson distinctly
recollected, had been spread out on the table.







Matthew Maule understood the insinuated suspicion.







According to some versions of the story, a regular contract to the above effect
was drawn up by a lawyer, and signed and sealed in the presence of witnesses.







He well knew that she was in her chamber, and engaged in no occupation that
could not readily be laid aside; for, as it happened, ever since Alice’s
name had been spoken, both her father and the carpenter had heard the sad and
sweet music of her harpsichord, and the airier melancholy of her accompanying
voice.







Alice looked towards her father, in surprise and inquiry.







After a further interval, Maule spoke.







She did not stir.







Then it was a strange sight to behold how the man of conventionalities shook
the powder out of his periwig; how the reserved and stately gentleman forgot
his dignity; how the gold-embroidered waistcoat flickered and glistened in the
firelight with the convulsion of rage, terror, and sorrow in the human heart
that was beating under it.







He waved his hands with an upward motion; and, after a few repetitions of
similar gestures, the beautiful Alice Pyncheon awoke from her strange trance.







Phœbe’s yet free and virgin spirit: he could establish an influence over
this good, pure, and simple child, as dangerous, and perhaps as disastrous, as
that which the carpenter of his legend had acquired and exercised over the
ill-fated Alice.







He made a slight gesture upward with his hand.







But Holgrave detained her a little longer.







Thus parted the old man and the rosy girl; and Phœbe took the wings of the
morning, and was soon flitting almost as rapidly away as if endowed with the
aerial locomotion of the angels to whom Uncle Venner had so graciously compared
her.







But a harsher sound succeeded to the mysterious notes; nor was the easterly day
fated to pass without an event sufficient in itself to poison, for Hepzibah and
Clifford, the balmiest air that ever brought the humming-birds along with it.







Pyncheon, who, after in vain trying the front door, had now effected his
entrance into the shop.







Judge, with the impatience natural to a reasonable man, on hearing anything so
utterly absurd as the above, in a discussion about matters of business.







Was it a little matter—a trifle to be prepared for in a single moment,
and to be rested from in another moment,—that he must now, after thirty
years, encounter a kinsman risen from a living tomb, and wrench a secret from
him, or else consign him to a living tomb again?







The Judge had taken his watch from his vest pocket and now held it in his hand,
measuring the interval which was to ensue before the appearance of Clifford.







At last, finding no other pretext for deferring the torture that she was to
inflict on Clifford,—her reluctance to which was the true cause of her
loitering at the window, her search for the artist, and even her abortive
prayer,—dreading, also, to hear the stern voice of Judge Pyncheon from
below stairs, chiding her delay,—she crept slowly, a pale, grief-stricken
figure, a dismal shape of woman, with almost torpid limbs, slowly to her
brother’s door, and knocked!







There was no reply.







Clifford returned no answer.







A silence.







Judge Pyncheon’s fiendish scheme would be ready accomplished to his
hands!







Nor could she otherwise account for the Judge’s quiescent mood than by
supposing him craftily on the watch, while Clifford developed these symptoms of
a distracted mind.







At last, therefore, and after so long estrangement from everything that the
world acted or enjoyed, they had been drawn into the great current of human
life, and were swept away with it, as by the suction of fate itself.







Meanwhile, looking from the window, they could see the world racing past them.







Hepzibah, on the other hand, felt herself more apart from human kind than even
in the seclusion which she had just quitted.







The conductor now applied for their tickets; and Clifford, who had made himself
the purse-bearer, put a bank-note into his hand, as he had observed others do.







His face darkened, and seemed to contract, and shrivel itself up, and wither
into age.







He turned again towards the old gentleman, and renewed the conversation.







Another business, which, however, he puts no great weight on (it is well, you
know, to be heedful, but not over-anxious, as respects one’s personal
health),—another business, then, was to consult his family physician.







Judge’s quietude, as he sits invisible; and that pertinacious ticking of
his watch!







Pyncheon’s presence into the street before the Seven Gables.







Alice’s Posies</h2>
<p>
Uncle Venner, trundling a wheelbarrow, was the earliest person stirring in the
neighborhood the day after the storm.







Pyncheon Street, in front of the House of the Seven Gables, was a far
pleasanter scene than a by-lane, confined by shabby fences, and bordered with
wooden dwellings of the meaner class, could reasonably be expected to present.







Aeneas and the Sibyl admittance into Hades.







The butcher was so much in earnest with his sweetbread of lamb, or whatever the
dainty might be, that he tried every accessible door of the Seven Gables, and
at length came round again to the shop, where he ordinarily found admittance.







This contemptuous tranquillity on the part of an occupant of the house, in
response to the butcher’s indefatigable efforts to attract notice, so
piqued the man of flesh that he determined to withdraw.







He tossed the titbit angrily into his cart, and drove off in a pet.







Though well soaked with rain, it was still partially legible.







Seven Gables; while the bolder signalized their hardihood by challenging their
comrades to race past the mansion at full speed.







It could not have been more than half an hour after the disappearance of the
Italian boy, with his unseasonable melodies, when a cab drove down the street.







There’s something wicked there!







The impression of the whole scene was that of a spot where no human foot had
left its print for many preceding days,—probably not since Phœbe’s
departure,—for she saw a side-comb of her own under the table of the
arbor, where it must have fallen on the last afternoon when she and Clifford
sat there.







Without hesitation, therefore, she stepped across the threshold, and had no
sooner entered than the door closed behind her.







Without taking away her hand, she looked eagerly in his face, not quick to
forebode evil, but unavoidably conscious that the state of the family had
changed since her departure, and therefore anxious for an explanation.







Yet the artist did not feel the horror, which was proper to Phœbe’s
sweet and order-loving character, at thus finding herself at issue with
society, and brought in contact with an event that transcended ordinary rules.







But how soon the heavy earth-dream settled down again!







And then, as if in sympathy with Phœbe’s whispered ejaculation, they
heard Hepzibah’s voice more distinctly.







The Departure</h2>
<p>
The sudden death of so prominent a member of the social world as the Honorable
Judge Jaffrey Pyncheon created a sensation (at least, in the circles more
immediately connected with the deceased) which had hardly quite subsided in a
fortnight.







Jaffrey’s previous steps had already pledged him to those which remained.







So craftily had he arranged the circumstances, that, at Clifford’s trial,
his cousin hardly found it necessary to swear to anything false, but only to
withhold the one decisive explanation, by refraining to state what he had
himself done and witnessed.







Recognizing little Ned Higgins among them, Hepzibah put her hand into her
pocket, and presented the urchin, her earliest and staunchest customer, with
silver enough to people the Domdaniel cavern of his interior with as various a
procession of quadrupeds as passed into the ark.







Two men were passing, just as the barouche drove off.







Uncle Venner, passing slowly from the ruinous porch, seemed to hear a strain of
music, and fancied that sweet Alice Pyncheon—after witnessing these
deeds, this bygone woe and this present happiness, of her kindred
mortals—had given one farewell touch of a spirit’s joy upon her
harpsichord, as she floated heavenward from the H<small>OUSE OF THE</small>
S<small>EVEN</small> G<small>ABLES</small>!







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.