He had a sublimity of thought, which taught him to despise the
voluptuous vices of the Neapolitans, and led him to higher pursuits.







Julia sought with eager anxiety to discover the sentiments of Vereza
towards her; she revolved each circumstance of the day, but they
afforded her little satisfaction; they reflected only a glimmering and
uncertain light, which instead of guiding, served only to perplex her.







Since she was beloved by Hippolitus, she could only be happy.







She had, however, the consolation of believing that her sentiments
towards the Count were unknown, and the sweet consciousness that her
conduct had been governed by a nice sense of propriety.







Bernini being all that now remained to me.







They compared this with the foregoing circumstance of the figure and
the light which had appeared; their imaginations kindled wild
conjectures, and they submitted their opinions to madame, entreating
her to inform them sincerely, whether she believed that disembodied
spirits were ever permitted to visit this earth.







No further sounds disturbed them for that time; and before the morning
dawned, weariness insensibly overcame apprehension, and sunk them in
repose.







Julia waited the return of night with restless and fearful impatience.







Her heart beat with apprehensions, which reason could not justify.







They passed lightly on, for their steps ran in whispering echoes
through the gallery, and often did Julia cast a fearful glance around.







Ferdinand drew his sword and sprang forward; his companions, screaming
with terror, ran back to madame's apartment.







The light now enabled him to take a more accurate survey of the place.







Julia hastily followed the steps of the marchioness, and entered the
castle.







He found Madame de Menon and his sisters awaiting his return in the
most painful anxiety; and, thus disappointed in all his endeavours to
penetrate the secret of these buildings, and fatigued with fruitless
search, he resolved to suspend farther enquiry.







When Hippolitus reached Naples, the marquis was yet living, but
expired a few days after his arrival, leaving the count heir to the
small possessions which remained from the extravagance of their
ancestors.







The business of adjusting his rights had till now detained him from
Sicily, whither he came for the sole purpose of declaring his love.







The marquis was retiring, and Ferdinand now perceived it necessary to
declare, that he had himself witnessed the sounds he mentioned.







The heart of Julia beat quick.







The marquis, delighted with the prospect of a connection so flattering
to his favorite passion, readily granted his consent, and immediately
sealed it with a promise.







Hippolitus, who was waiting for him with anxious impatience in the
north hall.







Julia passed the night in broken slumbers, and anxious consideration.







On the following night, when the inhabitants of the castle were
retired to rest, Hippolitus, whose expectation had lengthened the
hours into ages, accompanied by Ferdinand, revisited the closet.







Julia designed the joint victim of ambition and illicit love.







Hippolitus vainly endeavoured to sooth her—the noise suddenly ceased.







They listened, dreading to hear the sounds renewed; but, to their
utter astonishment, the silence of the place remained undisturbed.







Julia, on recovering her senses, found herself in a small room, of
which she had no remembrance, with her maid weeping over her.







She learned that Hippolitus had been borne away lifeless by his
people, that Ferdinand was confined in a dungeon by order of the
marquis, and that herself was a prisoner in a remote room, from which,
on the day after the morrow, she was to be removed to the chapel of
the castle, and there sacrificed to the ambition of her father, and
the absurd love of the Duke de Luovo.







The letter, when it was given to Emilia, excited emotions which she
found it impossible to disguise, but which did not, however, protect
her from a suspicion that she was concerned in the transaction, her
knowledge of which this letter appeared intended to conceal.







The servants joyfully obeyed, and the marquis locking the several
doors, returned with the keys to the habitable part of the castle.







The duke enquired concerning the course they had taken, and having
received information, remounted his horse, and set forward in pursuit.







They continued their course without meeting a single person.







They described also the behaviour of several people whom they had
robbed, with highly ludicrous allusions, and with much rude humour,
while the cave re-echoed with loud bursts of laughter and applause.







His sensations, however, on discovering his father, were not very
pleasing; but proclaiming the duke, he protected him from farther
outrage.







The menaces, and at length entreaties of the duke, to prevail with his
son to abandon his present way of life, were equally ineffectual.







Riccardo raised his arm, but instantly dropped it, and turned away.







The banditti sheathed their weapons, and stepped back.







To the enquiries he made of the persons he chanced to meet, favorable
answers were returned for a time, but he was at length bewildered in
uncertainity, and travelled for some hours in a direction which
chance, rather than judgment, prompted him to take.







The cavalier had no time to escape, but drew his sword, and defended
himself against the furious assault of the duke.







CHAPTER VI
</h3>
<p>
The castle of Mazzini was still the scene of dissension and misery.







The impatience and astonishment of the marquis being daily increased
by the lengthened absence of the duke, he dispatched servants to the
forest of Marentino, to enquire the occasion of this circumstance.







On the following morning Peter returned to the dungeon, scarcely
knowing what to expect, yet expecting something very strange, perhaps
the murder, perhaps the supernatural disappearance of his young lord.







CHAPTER VII
</h3>
<p>
Towards the close of day Madame de Menon arrived at a small village
situated among the mountains, where she purposed to pass the night.







Ferdinand and Emilia, she led madame to the place of her concealment.







This was a solitary cottage, in a close valley surrounded by
mountains, whose cliffs appeared wholly inaccessible to mortal foot.







Here Julia closed her narration, to which madame had listened with a
mixture of surprise and pity, which her eyes sufficiently discovered.







Madame took all affectionate leave of Julia, whose heart, in spite of
reason, sunk when she saw her depart, though but for the necessary
interval of repose.







On the return of the good woman, who had accompanied madame to the
village on the preceding night, Julia went to the cottage at Farrini.







Julia had every evil to apprehend; and the loneliness of the spot he
had chosen, enabled him to perpetrate any designs, however violent.







For the first time, she repented that she had left her father's house.







Comforted by these circumstances, and by the tranquil appearance of
every thing around her, she retired to rest, and passed the night in
peaceful slumbers.







The Duke de Luovo, after having been detained for some weeks by the
fever which his wounds had produced, and his irritated passions had
much prolonged, arrived at the castle of Mazzini.







The search after Julia still continued, and was still unsuccessful.







As Julia mused through the walks, and surveyed this vast monument of
barbarous superstition, it brought to her recollection an ode which
she often repeated with melancholy pleasure, as the composition of
Hippolitus.







The recollection of his virtue elevates my mind, and fills my heart
with a noble pride, which even the cold walls of a monastery have not
been able to subdue.







Cornelia resumed her narrative.







As she spoke she raised her eyes, which beamed with truth and meek
assurance to heaven; and the fine devotional suffusion of her
countenance seemed to characterize the beauty of an inspired saint.







I had but one crime to deplore, and that was the too tender
remembrance of him for whom I mourned, and whose idea, impressed upon
my heart, made it a blemished offering to God.







Luovo.







Several days elapsed, and no answer was returned from the <i>Abate</i>.







Julia too well understood this silence.







Menon, who wept over her tears of thankfulness.







Her lover sinking back, endeavoured to conceal his emotions, but the
deep sobs which agitated his breast betrayed his anguish, and the
tears of every spectator bedewed the sacred spot where beauty, sense,
and innocence expired.







The organ now swelled in mournful harmony; and the voices of the
assembly chanted in choral strain, a low and solemn requiem to the
spirit of the departed.







She knew, also, that the secret would never be published, unless as a
punishment for immediate violence, it being one of the first
principles of monastic duty, to observe a religious secrecy upon all
matters entrusted to them in confession.







The <i>Abate</i>, who well knew the marquis was wholly in his power, smiled
at the repetition of his menaces, and denied her request, under
pretence of his having now become responsible for her to the church.







Julia quitted the closet in mute despair, and repaired to madame, who
could now scarcely offer her the humble benefit of consolation.







Superior.







It was enough for Julia to know that Hippolitus lived; her fears of
detection, and her scruples concerning Ferdinand, instantly vanished;
she thought only of escape—and the means which had lately appeared so
formidable—so difficult in contrivance, and so dangerous in
execution, now seemed easy, certain, and almost accomplished.







Madame de Menon, to whom, notwithstanding her situation, her heart
bade a sorrowful adieu.







They continued their way without farther interruption; and among the
cliffs, at some distance from the cave, discovered, to their
inexpressible joy, their horses, who having broken their fastenings,
had strayed thither, and had now laid themselves down to rest.







Ferdinand and Julia immediately mounted; and descending to the plains,
took the road that led to a small sea-port at some leagues distant,
whence they could embark for Italy.







Notwithstanding her anxiety the scene diffused a soft complacency over
the mind of Julia.







About noon they reached the port, where Ferdinand was fortunate enough
to obtain a small vessel; but the wind was unfavourable, and it was
past midnight before it was possible for them to embark.







It was now past midnight, and the storm continued with unabated fury.







Ferdinand and Julia at the villa, where she experienced every kind and
tender affection.







Abate</i> now exulted in the success of his scheme, and anticipated, in
imagination, the rage and vexation of the marquis, when he should
discover that his daughter was lost to him for ever.







The report of Julia's disappearance spread rapidly beyond the walls,
and soon reached the ears of the marquis, who rejoiced in the
circumstance, believing that she must now inevitably fall into his
hands.







The mystery of Julia's flight was now dissolved; for it was evident by
whose means she had effected it, and the marquis issued orders to his
people to secure Ferdinand wherever he should be found.







Hippolitus paused to gaze upon the scene; the sacred stillness of
night increased its effect, and a secret dread, he knew not wherefore,
stole upon his heart.







They had not been long in this situation, when they heard a noise
which approached gradually, and which did not appear to come from the
avenue they had passed.







One of the robbers exclaiming with an oath that this was a golden
night, bade his comrades dispatch, adding he would go to find Paulo
and the lady.







The effect which the latter part of this sentence had upon the
prisoners in the vault, may be more easily imagined than described.







In a short time all without was confusion and uproar; the ruffian who
had left the court returned with the alarm that the lady was fled, and
that Paulo was murdered, The robbers quitting their booty to go in
search of the fugitive, and to discover the murderer, dreadful
vociferations resounded through every recess of the pile.







The officers came attended by a guard, and were every way prepared to
prosecute a strenuous search through these horrible recesses.







Hippolitus in his former terrible surmise; that the dying cavalier,
whom he had seen, was no other than Ferdinand, and he became furious.







He bade the officers prosecute their search, who, leaving a guard over
the banditti they had secured, followed him to the room where the late
dreadful scene had been acted.







CHAPTER XIV
</h3>
<p>
When Julia had rested, they followed the track before them, and in a
short time arrived at a village, where they obtained security and
refreshment.







She desired to retire for a time to some obscure convent, there to
await the issue of the event, which at present involved her in
perplexity and sorrow.







Hippolitus had provided against the necessity of entering many inns.







Having finished their repast, they pursued their journey; but
Hippolitus now began to doubt whether he was in the right direction.







The evening now closed in; and as they were doubtful of the road, and
found it would be impossible to reach Palini that night, they took the
way to a village, which they perceived at the extremity of the valley.







The pursuers, however, were almost come up with them, when they
reached the mouth of a cavern, into which she ran for concealment.







Hippolitus drew his sword; and awaiting his enemies, stood to defend
the entrance.







Truth now glimmered upon the mind of Julia, but so faintly, that
instead of enlightening, it served only to increase her perplexity.







When she considered the long and dreadful sufferings of her mother,
and that she had for many years lived so near her, ignorant of her
misery, and even of her existence—she was lost in astonishment and
pity.







I cannot guess, he has ceased his nocturnal visits, and comes only in
the day.







When Julia communicated her opinion, and the marchioness believed that
she had heard the voice of her son—her emotion was extreme, and it
was some time before she could resume her narration.







Julia could make no reply, but by pressing to her lips the hand which
was held forth to her, she saw all the wretchedness of her situation;
and her fearful uncertainty concerning Hippolitus and Ferdinand,
formed no inferior part of her affliction.







CHAPTER XV
</h3>
<p>
The marquis, meanwhile, whose indefatigable search after Julia failed
of success, was successively the slave of alternate passions, and he
poured forth the spleen of disappointment on his unhappy domestics.







He revolved the means which might effect his purpose—he saw but
one—this was the death of the marchioness.







Maria with severe vigilance.







When the first energy of his indignation was subsided, he determined,
therefore, to reprove and to punish, but hereafter to restore her to
favor.







In this resolution he went to her apartment, and reprehended her
falsehood in terms of just indignation.







Maria de Vellorno, in whom the late discovery had roused resentment,
instead of awakening penitence; and exasperated pride without exciting
shame—heard the upbraidings of the marquis with impatience, and
replied to them with acrimonious violence.







When the first violence of the emotions excited by the late scenes was
subsided, he enquired concerning Maria de Vellorno.







She descended to supper, where the marquis met her alone at table.







Her woman having once more left the room, stopped at the door to
listen, but all within remaining silent, she retired to rest.







The late Marquis de Mazzini, and Maria de Vellorno, were interred with
the honor due to their rank in the church of the convent of St Nicolo.







Their lives exhibited a boundless indulgence of violent and luxurious
passions, and their deaths marked the consequences of such indulgence,
and held forth to mankind a singular instance of divine vengeance.







CHAPTER XVI
</h3>
<p>
In turning up the ground of the cell, it was discovered that it
communicated with the dungeon in which Ferdinand had been confined,
and where he had heard those groans which had occasioned him so much
terror.







There appeared no way by which she could have escaped from her prison;
for both the door which opened upon the cell, and that which
terminated the avenue beyond, were fastened when tried by Ferdinand.







Ferdinand.







On the following morning Ferdinand returned with his friends to
Palermo, where he first disclosed the late fatal events of the castle.







From this period the castle of Mazzini, which had been the theatre of
a dreadful catastrophe; and whose scenes would have revived in the
minds of the chief personages connected with it, painful and shocking
reflections—was abandoned.







On their arrival at Naples, Ferdinand presented to the king a clear
and satisfactory account of the late events at the castle, in
consequence of which the marchioness was confirmed in her rank, and
Ferdinand was received as the sixth Marquis de Mazzini.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.