This Work<br>
<small>IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED</small>
</p>
<p style="text-align: center">
<small>BY</small><br>
THE AUTHOR
</p>
<hr>
<div class="chapter">
<h2>PREFACE</h2>
<p>
A preface to the first edition of “Jane Eyre” being unnecessary, I
gave none: this second edition demands a few words both of acknowledgment and
miscellaneous remark.







My thanks are due in three quarters.







To the Public, for the indulgent ear it has inclined to a plain tale with few
pretensions.







To the Press, for the fair field its honest suffrage has opened to an obscure
aspirant.







To my Publishers, for the aid their tact, their energy, their practical sense
and frank liberality have afforded an unknown and unrecommended Author.







Publishers and the select Reviewers, I say cordially, Gentlemen, I thank you
from my heart.







Pharisee, is not to lift an impious hand to the Crown of Thorns.







The world may not like to see these ideas dissevered, for it has been
accustomed to blend them; finding it convenient to make external show pass for
sterling worth—to let white-washed walls vouch for clean shrines.







It may hate him who dares to scrutinise and expose—to rase the gilding,
and show base metal under it—to penetrate the sepulchre, and reveal
charnel relics: but hate as it will, it is indebted to him.







Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he never prophesied good concerning him, but
evil; probably he liked the sycophant son of Chenaanah better; yet might Ahab
have escaped a bloody death, had he but stopped his ears to flattery, and
opened them to faithful counsel.







CURRER BELL.







This explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which may already have been
made, and to prevent future errors.







CURRER BELL.







I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chilly afternoons:
dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight, with nipped fingers and
toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by
the consciousness of my physical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana
Reed.







The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round their mama in the
drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with her darlings
about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy.







I sat cross-legged, like a Turk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain
nearly close, I was shrined in double retirement.







I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard, with its
inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its low horizon, girdled by a
broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent, attesting the hour of eventide.







The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marine phantoms.







The fiend pinning down the thief’s pack behind him, I passed over
quickly: it was an object of terror.







So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying a distant crowd
surrounding a gallows.







Moreland.







And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of being dragged forth
by the said Jack.







John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than I, for I
was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and unwholesome skin;
thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and large extremities.







John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy to me.







Accustomed to John Reed’s abuse, I never had an idea of replying to it;
my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the insult.







I returned to the window and fetched it thence.







In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.







Abbot stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, as
incredulous of my sanity.







Abigail.







Missis often my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me.







Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said—
</p>
<p>
“You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations to Mrs.







Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn’t have her heart for anything.







They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.







Out of these deep surrounding shades rose high, and glared white, the piled-up
mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy Marseilles counterpane.







Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy-chair near the head of the
bed, also white, with a footstool before it; and looking, as I thought, like a
pale throne.







Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour for
complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted slave was
still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had to stem a rapid rush of
retrospective thought before I quailed to the dismal present.







My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received: no one had
reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I had turned against him to
avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded with general opprobrium.







Abbot entered.







Bessie.







Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily.







Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence might be rough.







No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the red-room;
it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel the reverberation to this day.







Bessie answered that I was doing very well.







Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because punctuality
at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.







I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means of being kind;
and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, to be uneducated,
to grow up like one of the poor women I saw sometimes nursing their children or
washing their clothes at the cottage doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I
was not heroic enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste.







Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up the
gravel-walk.







Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the way out.







On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from Miss Abbot’s
communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman; that my
mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, who considered the
match beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was so irritated at her
disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; that after my mother and
father had been married a year, the latter caught the typhus fever while
visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing town where his curacy was
situated, and where that disease was then prevalent: that my mother took the
infection from him, and both died within a month of each other.







They went.







It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o’clock in the morning:
Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet been summoned to
their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to go and feed
her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond: and not less so of selling
the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the money she thus obtained.







I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in too great a hurry
to listen to explanations; she hauled me to the washstand, inflicted a
merciless, but happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap, water, and a
coarse towel; disciplined my head with a bristly brush, denuded me of my
pinafore, and then hurrying me to the top of the stairs, bid me go down
directly, as I was wanted in the breakfast-room.







Reed’s presence; restricted so long to the nursery, the breakfast,
dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful regions, on which it
dismayed me to intrude.







In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman; but then
I was very little; his features were large, and they and all the lines of his
frame were equally harsh and prim.







I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.







Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyes down on the
two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishing myself far enough away.







It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her light step came
tripping down the path.







Bessie’s presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had been
brooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhat cross.







The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated to indulge in:
somehow it pleased her.







I nodded.







The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horses and its top
laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urged haste; my trunk was
hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie’s neck, to which I clung with kisses.







Bessie and Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed,
remote and mysterious regions.







The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned into dusk, I began to
feel that we were getting very far indeed from Gateshead: we ceased to pass
through towns; the country changed; great grey hills heaved up round the
horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a valley, dark with wood, and long
after night had overclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst
trees.







Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not long slumbered when
the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open, and a person
like a servant was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the light of the
lamps.







The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale and large
forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, her countenance was
grave, her bearing erect.







Miller.







A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered the room, each walked
to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair,
which was that nearest the door, and around which the smallest of the children
were assembled: to this inferior class I was called, and placed at the bottom
of it.







A long grace was said and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for
the teachers, and the meal began.







A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, during which the
schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space of time it seemed to be
permitted to talk loud and more freely, and they used their privilege.







The whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused roundly.







The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.







But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-entered the house.







After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessons recommenced,
and were continued till five o’clock.







The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girl with whom I had
conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by Miss Scatcherd from a
history class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom.







In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourth class, and
regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, I had only been a
spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now to become an actor therein.







Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.







Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book-closet; she
was just putting back her handkerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear
glistened on her thin cheek.







The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fraction of the day at
Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed at five o’clock
had revived vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger: the long restraint of the
day was slackened; the schoolroom felt warmer than in the morning—its
fires being allowed to burn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure,
the place of candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licensed
uproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense of liberty.







On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flog her pupil,
Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables and laughing groups
without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when I passed the windows, I now
and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it snowed fast, a drift was already
forming against the lower panes; putting my ear close to the window, I could
distinguish from the gleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind
outside.







Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to one of the
fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed,
silent, abstracted from all round her by the companionship of a book, which she
read by the dim glare of the embers.







At the utterance of Miss Temple’s name, a soft smile flitted over her
grave face.







Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then make a remark,
but she said nothing.







Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor without
reply as without delay.







At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an exposed and hilly road,
where the bitter winter wind, blowing over a range of snowy summits to the
north, almost flayed the skin from our faces.







How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when we got back!







But, to the little ones at least, this was denied: each hearth in the
schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row of great girls, and
behind them the younger children crouched in groups, wrapping their starved
arms in their pinafores.







Man,” whose information respecting my past life and conversation was to
brand me as a bad child for ever: now there he was.







He paused.







Miss Temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she now
gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble, appeared to
be assuming also the coldness and fixity of that material; especially her
mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor’s chisel to open
it, and her brow settled gradually into petrified severity.







Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.







The two younger of the trio (fine girls of sixteen and seventeen) had grey
beaver hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostrich plumes, and from under the
brim of this graceful head-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately
curled; the elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed with
ermine, and she wore a false front of French curls.







Miss Smith, who was charged with the care of the linen and the inspection of
the dormitories: but I had no time to listen to what they said; other matters
called off and enchanted my attention.







I had not, at the same time, neglected precautions to secure my personal
safety; which I thought would be effected, if I could only elude observation.







The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.







Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed like burning-glasses against
my scorched skin.







A pause—in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves, and to feel
that the Rubicon was passed; and that the trial, no longer to be shirked, must
be firmly sustained.







Scatcherd’s can only see those minute defects, and are blind to the full
brightness of the orb.







Helen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her coming up the long,
vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.







You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well as you can.







I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be most moderate—most
correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in order to arrange coherently
what I had to say, I told her all the story of my sad childhood.







She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was well contented to
stand, for I derived a child’s pleasure from the contemplation of her
face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered
and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes), she proceeded to address Helen
Burns.







She rang her bell.







Brocklehurst’s own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron.







Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placed before each of us
a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel of toast, she got up, unlocked
a drawer, and taking from it a parcel wrapped in paper, disclosed presently to
our eyes a good-sized seed-cake.







We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not the least delight of
the entertainment was the smile of gratification with which our hostess
regarded us, as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare she
liberally supplied.







Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire; we sat one on
each side of her, and now a conversation followed between her and Helen, which
it was indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.







Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state in her mien,
of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation into the
ardent, the excited, the eager: something which chastened the pleasure of those
who looked on her and listened to her, by a controlling sense of awe; and such
was my feeling now: but as to Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.







Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more reluctantly; it was
Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second time breathed a
sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.







On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd: she was
examining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns’s, and when we
entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow she
should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to her shoulder.







Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she was
incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and large, had
continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her sad resignation
gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.







I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all its privations for Gateshead and
its daily luxuries.







Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwelling, when I speak of it as
bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the verge of a stream?







Assuredly, pleasant enough: but whether healthy or not is another question.







That forest-dell, where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog and fog-bred
pestilence; which, quickening with the quickening spring, crept into the Orphan
Asylum, breathed typhus through its crowded schoolroom and dormitory, and, ere
May arrived, transformed the seminary into an hospital.







Semi-starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most of the pupils to
receive infection: forty-five out of the eighty girls lay ill at one time.







But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully the beauties of the scene
and season; they let us ramble in the wood, like gipsies, from morning till
night; we did what we liked, went where we liked: we lived better too.







Besides, there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; our
breakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to prepare a
regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a large piece of cold
pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this we carried away with us to
the wood, where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined sumptuously.







I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice coming downstairs
on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken by Miss Temple into the garden;
but, on these occasions, I was not allowed to go and speak to her; I only saw
her from the schoolroom window, and then not distinctly; for she was much
wrapped up, and sat at a distance under the verandah.







And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend what had been
infused into it concerning heaven and hell; and for the first time it recoiled,
baffled; and for the first time glancing behind, on each side, and before it,
it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: it felt the one point where it
stood—the present; all the rest was formless cloud and vacant depth; and
it shuddered at the thought of tottering, and plunging amid that chaos.







The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side entrance which led to
the schoolroom: I was just in time; it was nine o’clock, and Miss Miller
was calling the pupils to go to bed.







She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face, pale, wasted,
but quite composed: she looked so little changed that my fear was instantly
dissipated.







I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and her cheek both
cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but she smiled as of old.







She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.







Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into a post-chaise, shortly
after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaise mount the hill and disappear
beyond its brow; and then retired to my own room, and there spent in solitude
the greatest part of the half-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.







Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.







Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welshwoman, and till now her
habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other light than as
a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep notes with satisfaction; I was
debarrassed of interruption; my half-effaced thought instantly revived.







I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chilly night; I
covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded <i>to think</i> again
with all my might.







This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then digested in my mind; I had
it in a clear practical form: I felt satisfied, and fell asleep.







My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for a pair of shoes;
so I discharged that business first, and when it was done, I stepped across the
clean and quiet little street from the shoemaker’s to the post-office: it
was kept by an old dame, who wore horn spectacles on her nose, and black
mittens on her hands.







Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.







I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant, matronly, yet
still young; very good-looking, with black hair and eyes, and lively
complexion.







In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously: “Bessie!







Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.







I smiled at Bessie’s frank answer: I felt that it was correct, but I
confess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteen most people wish
to please, and the conviction that they have not an exterior likely to second
that desire brings anything but gratification.







There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and then asked me to sit
down and give her a tune: I played a waltz or two, and she was charmed.







Brocklehurst Arms there: each went her separate way; she set off for the brow
of Lowood Fell to meet the conveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead,
I mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to new duties and a new life in the
unknown environs of Millcote.







I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into the inn-passage: a
man was standing by the open door, and in the lamp-lit street I dimly saw a
one-horse conveyance.







Thornfield.







She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove my shawl and untie
my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herself so much trouble.







And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys, and
delivered them to the servant.







I repeated the question more distinctly.







I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what way Miss Varens
was connected with her; but I recollected it was not polite to ask too many
questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.







My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk; and I drew my
chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincere wish that she might find
my company as agreeable as she anticipated.







Of course I did not—I had never heard of him before; but the old lady
seemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact, with which
everybody must be acquainted by instinct.







She will be glad: nobody here understands her: Madame Fairfax is all English.







Fairfax.







I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluent tongue of
Madame Pierrot.







The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer; but I suppose the
point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of love and jealousy warbled
with the lisp of childhood; and in very bad taste that point was: at least I
thought so.







The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in an odd
murmur.







The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,—a woman of between
thirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, and with a hard, plain
face: any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived.







It is thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or
learn more than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.







A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at once so far away
and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter, which effaced the
soft wave-wanderings; as, in a picture, the solid mass of a crag, or the rough
boles of a great oak, drawn in dark and strong on the foreground, efface the
aërial distance of azure hill, sunny horizon, and blended clouds where
tint melts into tint.







I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he was pronouncing some
formula which prevented him from replying to me directly.







I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, for I now
drew near him again.







He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyes in my direction
before.







In two minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when he tried to
move.







I sought it and found it.







Rochester,” as she dubbed him (I had not before heard his prenomens), and
to conjecture what presents he had brought her: for it appears he had intimated
the night before, that when his luggage came from Millcote, there would be
found amongst it a little box in whose contents she had an interest.







Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and kept in her shade as we crossed
that apartment; and, passing the arch, whose curtain was now dropped, entered
the elegant recess beyond.







Adèle was leading me by the hand round the room, showing me the
beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnières.







We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adèle wanted to take a seat on my knee, but
she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.







The widow looked bewildered.







Rochester.







I assented.







I departed, obeying his directions.







I brought the portfolio from the library.







He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed them alternately.







Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced through the green
water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible, whence the bracelet had
been washed or torn.







On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faint lustre touched
the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision of the Evening
Star.







Rochester presently.







Adèle went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured the caress,
but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would have done, nor so much.







I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adèle to bed.







Millcote or the neighbourhood called, and sometimes stayed to dine with him.







When his sprain was well enough to admit of horse exercise, he rode out a good
deal; probably to return these visits, as he generally did not come back till
late at night.







We were, as I have said, in the dining-room: the lustre, which had been lit for
dinner, filled the room with a festal breadth of light; the large fire was all
red and clear; the purple curtains hung rich and ample before the lofty window
and loftier arch; everything was still, save the subdued chat of Adèle
(she dared not speak loud), and, filling up each pause, the beating of winter
rain against the panes.







I had seen him look before; not quite so stern—much less gloomy.







He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had been looking the same
length of time at him, when, turning suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on
his physiognomy.







He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over his brow, and
showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs, but an abrupt deficiency
where the suave sign of benevolence should have risen.







Instead of speaking, I smiled; and not a very complacent or submissive smile
either.







Accordingly I sat and said nothing: “If he expects me to talk for the
mere sake of talking and showing off, he will find he has addressed himself to
the wrong person,” I thought.







He had deigned an explanation, almost an apology, and I did not feel insensible
to his condescension, and would not seem so.







He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye but his own; then,
folding his arms, which he had half extended, on his chest, he seemed to
enclose in their embrace the invisible being.







Adèle (I have my own reasons for thinking her a curious
study,—reasons that I may, nay, that I shall, impart to you some day).







Ere long, Adèle’s little foot was heard tripping across the hall.







We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused; the hall was before us.







Adèle here ran before him with her shuttlecock.







Adèle here came running up again.







I, indeed, talked comparatively little, but I heard him talk with relish.







It was his nature to be communicative; he liked to open to a mind unacquainted
with the world glimpses of its scenes and ways (I do not mean its corrupt
scenes and wicked ways, but such as derived their interest from the great scale
on which they were acted, the strange novelty by which they were
characterised); and I had a keen delight in receiving the new ideas he offered,
in imagining the new pictures he portrayed, and following him in thought
through the new regions he disclosed, never startled or troubled by one noxious
allusion.







Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not
sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his
destiny had risen up before him, and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.







I briefly related to him what had transpired: the strange laugh I had heard in
the gallery: the step ascending to the third storey; the smoke,—the smell
of fire which had conducted me to his room; in what state I had found matters
there, and how I had deluged him with all the water I could lay hands on.







He listened very gravely; his face, as I went on, expressed more concern than
astonishment; he did not immediately speak when I had concluded.







He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.







He seemed surprised—very inconsistently so, as he had just told me to go.







He held out his hand; I gave him mine: he took it first in one, then in both
his own.







He paused; gazed at me: words almost visible trembled on his lips,—but
his voice was checked.







Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.







During the early part of the morning, I momentarily expected his coming; he was
not in the frequent habit of entering the schoolroom, but he did step in for a
few minutes sometimes, and I had the impression that he was sure to visit it
that day.







I still stood absolutely dumfoundered at what appeared to me her miraculous
self-possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy, when the cook entered.







She was one of the ladies who sang: a gentleman accompanied her on the piano.







When once more alone, I reviewed the information I had got; looked into my
heart, examined its thoughts and feelings, and endeavoured to bring back with a
strict hand such as had been straying through imagination’s boundless and
trackless waste, into the safe fold of common sense.







Arraigned at my own bar, Memory having given her evidence of the hopes, wishes,
sentiments I had been cherishing since last night—of the general state of
mind in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight past; Reason having come
forward and told, in her own quiet way, a plain, unvarnished tale, showing how
I had rejected the real, and rabidly devoured the ideal;—I pronounced
judgment to this effect:—
</p>
<p>
That a greater fool than Jane Eyre had never breathed the breath of life; that
a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweet lies, and swallowed
poison as if it were nectar.







I went on with my day’s business tranquilly; but ever and anon vague
suggestions kept wandering across my brain of reasons why I should quit
Thornfield; and I kept involuntarily framing advertisements and pondering
conjectures about new situations: these thoughts I did not think to check; they
might germinate and bear fruit if they could.







The charwoman was going on; but here Leah turned and perceived me, and she
instantly gave her companion a nudge.







Thornfield; and that from participation in that mystery I was purposely
excluded.







The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at last wheels were heard;
four equestrians galloped up the drive, and after them came two open carriages.







Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants one after another: each came
out gaily and airily, with dress that gleamed lustrous through the dusk.







I found Adèle peeping through the schoolroom door, which she held ajar.







I answered.







The crimson curtain hung before the arch: slight as was the separation this
drapery formed from the party in the adjoining saloon, they spoke in so low a
key that nothing of their conversation could be distinguished beyond a soothing
murmur.







Parisienne’s earnest and innate devotion to matters of dress.







A soft sound of rising now became audible; the curtain was swept back from the
arch; through it appeared the dining-room, with its lit lustre pouring down
light on the silver and glass of a magnificent dessert-service covering a long
table; a band of ladies stood in the opening; they entered, and the curtain
fell behind them.







Louisa, was taller and more elegant in figure; with a very pretty face, of that
order the French term <i>minois chiffoné</i>: both sisters were fair as
lilies.







Lady Lynn was a large and stout personage of about forty, very erect, very
haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin robe of changeful sheen: her dark
hair shone glossily under the shade of an azure plume, and within the circlet
of a band of gems.







Blanche and Mary were of equal stature,—straight and tall as poplars.







French apart to her mamma; and she talked it well, with fluency and with a good
accent.







Rochester glance my way; and I involuntarily shrank farther into the shade: but
he never turned his eyes.







The young lady thus claimed as the dowager’s special property, reiterated
her question with an explanation.







I suppose, from the answer elicited, it was a reminder that one of the
anathematised race was present.







Dent.







He looked at me for a minute.







I have before observed, was raised two steps above the dining-room, and on the
top of the upper step, placed a yard or two back within the room, appeared a
large marble basin, which I recognised as an ornament of the
conservatory—where it usually stood, surrounded by exotics, and tenanted
by gold fish—and whence it must have been transported with some trouble,
on account of its size and weight.







Israelitish princess of the patriarchal days; and such was doubtless the
character she intended to represent.







On its third rising only a portion of the drawing-room was disclosed; the rest
being concealed by a screen, hung with some sort of dark and coarse drapery.







The marble basin was removed; in its place, stood a deal table and a kitchen
chair: these objects were visible by a very dim light proceeding from a horn
lantern, the wax candles being all extinguished.







Ingram; she was complimenting him on his acting.







I saw he was going to marry her, for family, perhaps political reasons, because
her rank and connections suited him; I felt he had not given her his love, and
that her qualifications were ill adapted to win from him that treasure.







This was the point—this was where the nerve was touched and
teased—this was where the fever was sustained and fed: <i>she could not
charm him</i>.







Instead of wishing to shun, I longed only to dare—to divine it; and I
thought Miss Ingram happy, because one day she might look into the abyss at her
leisure, explore its secrets and analyse their nature.







Some parleying was audible in the hall, and soon the new-comer entered.







He bowed to Lady Ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.







Excitement instantly seized the whole party: a running fire of raillery and
jests was proceeding when Sam returned.







Again Sam vanished; and mystery, animation, expectation rose to full flow once
more.







Sam went and returned.







Miss Ingram rose solemnly: “I go first,” she said, in a tone which
might have befitted the leader of a forlorn hope, mounting a breach in the van
of his men.







Sam’s calves must have ached with the exercise, permission was at last,
with great difficulty, extorted from the rigorous Sibyl, for the three to wait
upon her in a body.







Their visit was not so still as Miss Ingram’s had been: we heard
hysterical giggling and little shrieks proceeding from the library; and at the
end of about twenty minutes they burst the door open, and came running across
the hall, as if they were half-scared out of their wits.







In the midst of the tumult, and while my eyes and ears were fully engaged in
the scene before me, I heard a hem close at my elbow: I turned, and saw Sam.







An extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bending over the fire, and
seemed reading in a little black book, like a prayer-book, by the light of the
blaze: she muttered the words to herself, as most old women do, while she read;
she did not desist immediately on my entrance: it appeared she wished to finish
a paragraph.







She again put her short black pipe to her lips, and renewed her smoking with
vigour.







I started to my feet when I heard the name.







I said nothing.







Rochester stepped out of his disguise.







He staggered.







The night—its silence—its rest, was rent in twain by a savage, a
sharp, a shrilly sound that ran from end to end of Thornfield Hall.







My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my stretched arm was paralysed.







A chamber-door opened: some one ran, or rushed, along the gallery.







Another step stamped on the flooring above and something fell; and there was
silence.







They ran to and fro; they crowded together: some sobbed, some stumbled: the
confusion was inextricable.







Misses Eshton were clinging about him now; and the two dowagers, in vast white
wrappers, were bearing down on him like ships in full sail.







Louisa, return to your nests like a pair of doves, as you are.







My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat.







He glided up the gallery and up the stairs, and stopped in the dark, low
corridor of the fateful third storey: I had followed and stood at his side.







I felt a thrill while I answered him; but no coldness, and no faintness.







Here then I was in the third storey, fastened into one of its mystic cells;
night around me; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes and hands; a
murderess hardly separated from me by a single door: yes—that was
appalling—the rest I could bear; but I shuddered at the thought of Grace
Poole bursting out upon me.







Rochester’s visit it seemed spellbound: all the night I heard but three
sounds at three long intervals,—a step creak, a momentary renewal of the
snarling, canine noise, and a deep human groan.







The candle, wasted at last, went out; as it expired, I perceived streaks of
grey light edging the window curtains: dawn was then approaching.







Mason.







I went; sought the repository he had mentioned, found the articles named, and
returned with them.







I retired as directed.







Rochester presently.







Again I ran, and again returned, bearing an immense mantle lined and edged with
fur.







I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels.







He held out the tiny glass, and I half filled it from the water-bottle on the
washstand.







I did so; he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid, and presented it to
Mason.







The patient rose.







Rochester, as he closed and barred the heavy yard-gates.







He had opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.







April showers and gleams, followed by a lovely spring morning, could make them:
the sun was just entering the dappled east, and his light illumined the
wreathed and dewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet walks under them.







He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush, and offered it to me.







He laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as hastily threw it from
him.







The arbour was an arch in the wall, lined with ivy; it contained a rustic seat.







I answered him by assuming it: to refuse would, I felt, have been unwise.







He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of the walk, and when he came
back he was humming a tune.







The next day Bessie was sent for home to the deathbed of her little sister.







Ingram, the two Misses Eshton, and their admirers, were all busied in the game.







I entered.







I went on to describe to her the gay company that had lately been staying at
the house; and to these details Bessie listened with interest: they were
precisely of the kind she relished.







Brocklehurst: the very rug he had stood upon still covered the hearth.







In each of the sisters there was one trait of the mother—and only one;
the thin and pallid elder daughter had her parent’s Cairngorm eye: the
blooming and luxuriant younger girl had her contour of jaw and
chin—perhaps a little softened, but still imparting an indescribable
hardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous and buxom.







A sneer, however, whether covert or open, had now no longer that power over me
it once possessed: as I sat between my cousins, I was surprised to find how
easy I felt under the total neglect of the one and the semi-sarcastic
attentions of the other—Eliza did not mortify, nor Georgiana ruffle me.







The fact was, I had other things to think about; within the last few months
feelings had been stirred in me so much more potent than any they could
raise—pains and pleasures so much more acute and exquisite had been
excited than any it was in their power to inflict or bestow—that their
airs gave me no concern either for good or bad.







Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.







More than ten days elapsed before I had again any conversation with her.







Provided with a case of pencils, and some sheets of paper, I used to take a
seat apart from them, near the window, and busy myself in sketching fancy
vignettes, representing any scene that happened momentarily to shape itself in
the ever-shifting kaleidoscope of imagination: a glimpse of sea between two
rocks; the rising moon, and a ship crossing its disk; a group of reeds and
water-flags, and a naiad’s head, crowned with lotus-flowers, rising out
of them; an elf sitting in a hedge-sparrow’s nest, under a wreath of
hawthorn-bloom.







Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me, spent most of her time in
lying on the sofa, fretting about the dulness of the house, and wishing over
and over again that her aunt Gibson would send her an invitation up to town.







She closed her lips.







Georgiana took out her handkerchief and blew her nose for an hour afterwards;
Eliza sat cold, impassable, and assiduously industrious.







It was a wet and windy afternoon: Georgiana had fallen asleep on the sofa over
the perusal of a novel; Eliza was gone to attend a saint’s-day service at
the new church—for in matters of religion she was a rigid formalist: no
weather ever prevented the punctual discharge of what she considered her
devotional duties; fair or foul, she went to church thrice every Sunday, and as
often on week-days as there were prayers.







In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns, recalled her dying
words—her faith—her doctrine of the equality of disembodied souls.







I said nothing: I was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my
identity.







I assured her we were alone.







She made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her face changed; she
seemed to experience some inward sensation—the precursor, perhaps, of the
last pang.







It was dated three years back.







There is some difference between living with such an one as you and with
Georgiana: you perform your own part in life and burden no one.







I then returned: “You are not without sense, cousin Eliza; but what you
have, I suppose, in another year will be walled up alive in a French convent.







I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I know not; being scarcely
cognisant of my movements, and solicitous only to appear calm; and, above all,
to control the working muscles of my face—which I feel rebel insolently
against my will, and struggle to express what I had resolved to conceal.







But I have a veil—it is down: I may make shift yet to behave with decent
composure.







I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had he tried.







I that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future: I stopped my ears
against the voice that kept warning me of near separation and coming grief.







A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to Thornfield Hall.







I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind—could his shadow feel?







I started at first, and then I approached him.







This was a blow: but I did not let it prostrate me.







Ireland, I shall never see you again, Jane: that’s morally certain.







I never go over to Ireland, not having myself much of a fancy for the country.







I could risk no sort of answer by this time: my heart was still.







The vehemence of emotion, stirred by grief and love within me, was claiming
mastery, and struggling for full sway, and asserting a right to predominate, to
overcome, to live, rise, and reign at last: yes,—and to speak.







Another effort set me at liberty, and I stood erect before him.







I was silent: I thought he mocked me.







He rose, and with a stride reached me.







Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from his grasp: for I was
still incredulous.







His face was very much agitated and very much flushed, and there were strong
workings in the features, and strange gleams in the eyes.







Rochester came thrice to my door in the course of it, to ask if I was safe and
tranquil: and that was comfort, that was strength for anything.







Before I left my bed in the morning, little Adèle came running in to
tell me that the great horse-chestnut at the bottom of the orchard had been
struck by lightning in the night, and half of it split away.







Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love and promise.







He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.







Fairfax, sir: she saw me with you last night in the hall, and she was shocked.







She looked at me bewildered.







She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that they had there found no
charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.







I was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism, that the tears rose to my eyes.







I was growing truly irritated: happily, Adèle ran in.







She obeyed him with what speed she might.







Adèle.







I’ll wear nothing but my old Lowood frocks to the end of the chapter.







He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage, and while he
afterwards lifted out Adèle, I entered the house, and made good my
retreat upstairs.







I assured him I was naturally hard—very flinty, and that he would often
find me so; and that, moreover, I was determined to show him divers rugged
points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know
fully what sort of a bargain he had made, while there was yet time to rescind
it.







From less to more, I worked him up to considerable irritation; then, after he
had retired, in dudgeon, quite to the other end of the room, I got up, and
saying, “I wish you good-night, sir,” in my natural and wonted
respectful manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got away.







The month of courtship had wasted: its very last hours were being numbered.







It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feverish; not only the
anticipation of the great change—the new life which was to commence
to-morrow: both these circumstances had their share, doubtless, in producing
that restless, excited mood which hurried me forth at this late hour into the
darkening grounds: but a third cause influenced my mind more than they.







I disclose my secret to him, you shall share the confidence.







It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the wind, delivering my
trouble of mind to the measureless air-torrent thundering through space.







The wind roared high in the great trees which embowered the gates; but the road
as far as I could see, to the right hand and the left, was all still and
solitary: save for the shadows of clouds crossing it at intervals as the moon
looked out, it was but a long pale line, unvaried by one moving speck.







I now ran to meet him.







I sat down near him, but told him I could not eat.







I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face: it was ardent and
flushed.







Sophie called me upstairs to look at my wedding-dress, which they had just
brought; and under it in the box I found your present—the veil which, in
your princely extravagance, you sent for from London: resolved, I suppose,
since I would not have jewels, to cheat me into accepting something as costly.







The disquietude of his air, the somewhat apprehensive impatience of his manner,
surprised me: but I proceeded.







Adèle in my arms, I watched the slumber of childhood—so tranquil,
so passionless, so innocent—and waited for the coming day: all my life
was awake and astir in my frame: and as soon as the sun rose I rose too.







Rochester.







The church, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the gates; the footman
soon returned.







At the churchyard wicket he stopped: he discovered I was quite out of breath.







And now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of God rising calm
before me, of a rook wheeling round the steeple, of a ruddy morning sky beyond.







How his eye shone, still watchful, and yet wild beneath!







An inaudible reply escaped Mason’s white lips.







Briggs, Wood, Mason, I invite you all to come up to the house and visit Mrs.







A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report: the clothed hyena
rose up, and stood tall on its hind-feet.







Rochester then turned to the spectators: he looked at them with a smile both
acrid and desolate.







Compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder—this face with that
mask—this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of the gospel and
man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged!







The clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition or
reproof, with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too departed.







The morning had been a quiet morning enough—all except the brief scene
with the lunatic: the transaction in the church had not been noisy; there was
no explosion of passion, no loud altercation, no dispute, no defiance or
challenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken, a calmly pronounced
objection to the marriage made; some stern, short questions put by Mr.







Rochester; answers, explanations given, evidence adduced; an open admission of
the truth had been uttered by my master; then the living proof had been seen;
the intruders were gone, and all was over.







Conscience, turned tyrant, held Passion by the throat, told her tauntingly, she
had yet but dipped her dainty foot in the slough, and swore that with that arm
of iron he would thrust her down to unsounded depths of agony.







Rochester, who sat in a chair across my chamber threshold.







He recommenced his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time just before me.







His voice and hand quivered: his large nostrils dilated; his eye blazed: still
I dared to speak.







England.







I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion.







A pause.







I was experiencing an ordeal: a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals.







Another long silence.







His voice rose.







Still indomitable was the reply—“<i>I</i> care for myself.







As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.







Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire from his eyes; erect he
sprang; he held his arms out; but I evaded the embrace, and at once quitted the
room.







That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting with impatience for day.







Thornfield.







Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here: I had a vague dread that
wild cattle might be near, or that some sportsman or poacher might discover me.







I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the heat of the summer day.







The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I devoured it
ravenously.







As the wet twilight deepened, I stopped in a solitary bridle-path, which I had
been pursuing an hour or more.







Entering the gate and passing the shrubs, the silhouette of a house rose to
view, black, low, and rather long; but the guiding light shone nowhere.







German I could not tell.







Both were again silent.







The woman rose: she opened a door, through which I dimly saw a passage: soon I
heard her stir a fire in an inner room; she presently came back.







She wiped her eyes with her apron: the two girls, grave before, looked sad now.







Distrust, the very feeling I dreaded, appeared in Hannah’s face.







These words I not only thought, but uttered; and thrusting back all my misery
into my heart, I made an effort to compel it to remain there—dumb and
still.







I was silent.







I shook my head.







It was full of the fragrance of new bread and the warmth of a generous fire.







I maintained a grave silence for some minutes.







She put her floury and horny hand into mine; another and heartier smile
illumined her rough face, and from that moment we were friends.







Having finished my task of gooseberry picking, I asked where the two ladies and
their brother were now.







John, “as they would have a pleasure in keeping and cherishing a
half-frozen bird, some wintry wind might have driven through their casement.







If in our trio there was a superior and a leader, it was Diana.







Diana and Mary’s general answer to this question was a sigh, and some
minutes of apparently mournful meditation.







But besides his frequent absences, there was another barrier to friendship with
him: he seemed of a reserved, an abstracted, and even of a brooding nature.







He now smiled: and not a bitter or a sad smile, but one well pleased and deeply
gratified.







Both the sisters seemed struck: not shocked or appalled; the tidings appeared
in their eyes rather momentous than afflicting.







He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and again went out.







He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatic voice; looking, when he
had ceased speaking, not at me, but at the setting sun, at which I looked too.







As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing Carlo.







There was an enjoyment in accepting their simple kindness, and in repaying it
by a consideration—a scrupulous regard to their feelings—to which
they were not, perhaps, at all times accustomed, and which both charmed and
benefited them; because, while it elevated them in their own eyes, it made them
emulous to merit the deferential treatment they received.







I once, despite his reserve, had the daring to make on his confidence.







I told her she must come and sit another day.







Morton school, and said he only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too
good for the place, and would soon quit it for one more suitable.







I thought I would far rather be where I am than in any high family in the land.







He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me, irresolute, disturbed: he
again surveyed the picture.







Since I had ascertained that Rosamond really preferred him, and that her father
was not likely to oppose the match, I—less exalted in my views than St.







John—had been strongly disposed in my own heart to advocate their union.







I humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast and low: I stood silent.







Amidst this hush the quartet sped; he replaced the watch, laid the picture
down, rose, and stood on the hearth.







I gazed at him in wonder.







I smiled incredulously.







Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside my palette.







Once more he looked at the portrait.







He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which I was accustomed to
rest my hand in painting, to prevent the cardboard from being sullied.







And Tweed’s fair river broad and deep,<br>
    And Cheviot’s mountains lone;<br>
The massive towers, the donjon keep,<br>
The flanking walls that round them sweep,<br>
    In yellow lustre shone”—
</p>
<p>
I soon forgot storm in music.







He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip, and still his eye dwelt
dreamily on the glowing grate; thinking it urgent to say something, I asked him
presently if he felt any cold draught from the door, which was behind him.







Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, I complied.







Silence succeeded.







Here was a new stunner—I had been calculating on four or five thousand.







I again felt rather like an individual of but average gastronomical powers
sitting down to feast alone at a table spread with provisions for a hundred.







He was lifting the latch: a sudden thought occurred to me.







Of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a climax: gratified it must
be, and that without delay; and I told him so.







John had said another word; but I cannot expect the reader to have the same
intuitive perception, so I must repeat his explanation.







He bowed.







I scorned the insinuation of helplessness and distraction, shook off his hand,
and began to walk about again.







He smiled approbation: we shook hands, and he took leave.







I, each became possessed of a competency.







Bäuerinnen; and the best of them seemed to me ignorant, coarse, and
besotted, compared with my Morton girls.







I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it down, and withdrawing to his
accustomed window recess, he began to read it.







Pagan—her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors: a steadfast bulwark
for great interests to rest upon; but, at the fireside, too often a cold
cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.







His sisters looked at each other and at me; we all three looked at him: he was
serene as glass.







Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary to his plans.







And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and not a little
weather-beaten, I never dared complain, because I saw that to murmur would be
to vex him: on all occasions fortitude pleased him; the reverse was a special
annoyance.







He then went on to explain that Hindostanee was the language he was himself at
present studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget the commencement;
that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and
again go over the elements, and so fix them thoroughly in his mind; that his
choice had hovered for some time between me and his sisters; but that he had
fixed on me because he saw I could sit at a task the longest of the three.







I wrote again: there was a chance of my first letter having missed.







Renewed hope followed renewed effort: it shone like the former for some weeks,
then, like it, it faded, flickered: not a line, not a word reached me.







When half a year wasted in vain expectancy, my hope died out, and then I felt
dark indeed.







I felt as if an awful charm was framing round and gathering over me: I trembled
to hear some fatal word spoken which would at once declare and rivet the spell.







He had calculated on these first objections: he was not irritated by them.







Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded his arms on his
chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared for a long and trying
opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience to last him to its
close—resolved, however, that that close should be conquest for him.







My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion advanced with slow sure step.







England, the co-operation with me in my future labours—you do not object.







I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my marrow—his hold on my
limbs.







He looked at me fixedly, compressing his well-cut lips while he did so.







Whether he was incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell: he
could command his countenance thoroughly.







I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.







I have not much pride under such circumstances: I would always rather be happy
than dignified; and I ran after him—he stood at the foot of the stairs.







No happy reconciliation was to be had with him—no cheering smile or
generous word: but still the Christian was patient and placid; and when I asked
him if he forgave me, he answered that he was not in the habit of cherishing
the remembrance of vexation; that he had nothing to forgive, not having been
offended.







I was banished and banned, he added the force of contrast; and this I am sure
he did not by malice, but on principle.







He now turned quite from the moon and faced me.







The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward, but it did not yet crash
down.







His lips and cheeks turned white—quite white.







Most bitterly he smiled—most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine.







Again he turned lividly pale; but, as before, controlled his passion perfectly.







I hastened upstairs as I saw him entering the garden.







I had roused in him, and now believed he had forgiven me once more.







The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them: especially as I
felt, by the slight, indescribable alteration in sound, that in uttering them,
his eye had turned on me.







Fairfax Rochester; and it spoke in pain and woe, wildly, eerily, urgently.







At breakfast I announced to Diana and Mary that I was going a journey, and
should be absent at least four days.







I felt like the messenger-pigeon flying home.







Hear an illustration, reader.







I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house: I saw a blackened ruin.







And there was the silence of death about it: the solitude of a lonesome wild.







He shuddered.







I proceeded: at last my way opened, the trees thinned a little; presently I
beheld a railing, then the house—scarce, by this dim light,
distinguishable from the trees; so dank and green were its decaying walls.







Yes, life of some kind there was; for I heard a movement—that narrow
front-door was unclosing, and some shape was about to issue from the grange.







It opened slowly: a figure came out into the twilight and stood on the step; a
man without a hat: he stretched forth his hand as if to feel whether it rained.







Dusk as it was, I had recognised him—it was my master, Edward Fairfax
Rochester, and no other.







I now drew near and knocked: John’s wife opened for me.







When she returned, I inquired what he had said.







I approached him with the now only half-filled glass; Pilot followed me, still
excited.







He groped; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.







The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm was seized, my
shoulder—neck—waist—I was entwined and gathered to him.







I came down as soon as I thought there was a prospect of breakfast.







I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.







I had done, that name was immediately taken up.







Then followed this cross-examination.







A pause.







A second pause.







Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.







Again he smiled: I gave him comfort.







He looked and spoke with eagerness: his old impetuosity was rising.







He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.







The housekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic order of
people, to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable piece of
news without incurring the danger of having one’s ears pierced by some
shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent of wordy wonderment.







My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my experience of married life,
and one brief glance at the fortunes of those whose names have most frequently
recurred in this narrative, and I have done.







Greatheart, who guards his pilgrim convoy from the onslaught of Apollyon.







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.