She went and married a poor curate, and became a stupid Mrs.







Gibson; and, having ascertained from Molly that she was "the
doctor's" child, she showed more willingness to comply with Mrs.







I'll sit by you and tell you who they all are, and all about them.







The younger doctor had carried the day; nearly every one sent for Mr.







Hollingford speculated much on which young lady would become Mrs.







There was not much intercourse between Lord Hollingford and himself;
the one was too silent and shy, the other too busy, to seek each
other's society with the perseverance required to do away with the
social distinction of rank that prevented their frequent meetings.







But each was thoroughly pleased to come into contact with the other.







Hollingford came into the neighbourhood—was a certain Squire Hamley.







      M.







      Capiat hanc dosim ter die in aquâ purâ.







I wonder any man alive<br>
   Should ever rear a daughter.







I asked of the wind, but answer made it none,<br>
Save its accustomed sad and solitary moan—
</td></tr>
</tbody></table>
</div>
<p class="noindent">she kept saying
to herself, losing her sense of whatever meaning the
words had ever had, in the repetition which had become mechanical.







Suddenly there was the snap of a shutting gate; wheels crackling on
the dry gravel, horses' feet on the drive; a loud cheerful voice in
the house, coming up through the open windows, the hall, the
passages, the staircase, with unwonted fulness and roundness of tone.







I asked of the wind, but answer made it none.







Osborne wished a tree cut down, or kept standing, or had
such-and-such a fancy about the game, or desired something unusual
about the horses; and they had all to attend to it as if it were law.







Cumnor which she had not expressly ordered, as Lord Cumnor himself.







Lady Cumnor was more interested in Molly the more she looked at her;
and her gaze was pretty steady through her gold-rimmed eye-glasses.







Two is company,<br>
Three is trumpery.







Cynthia's coming over to the wedding; and at the time Mrs.







Cumnor—a little put out by the marriage not being deferred till her
grandchildren's Christmas holidays—had nevertheless given Mrs.







Browning, in a way intended to convey a great deal of meaning to her
sister and none at all to Molly.







The man recovered of the bite;<br>
The dog it was that died.







Molly was to call her new relation had never occurred to him before.







Towers, or in the town; and no one could do them so well as Clare,
who was acquainted with all the tastes and ways of the countess.







And then it has thrown madam into one of her
bad fits of illness; and she seems to have a fancy for you, child!







Squire's London agents, who found out that certain disreputable
attorneys were making inquiries as to the entail of the estate;—oh!







Osborne was coming; but very little was said about him in any way.







She added, "I think I should have done so, even without a promise.







But love me on, and know not why,<br>
So hast thou the same reason still<br>
To dote upon me ever.







All the time she worked, she sang; she had a sweet voice in singing,
as well as in speaking, and used to run up and down her gay French
<i>chansons</i> without any difficulty; so flexible in the art was she.







Osborne as his heir, and the future representative of the family.







Osborne Hamley should be cheered up by a quiet little dinner-party.







Molly remembered so well since the very first day she had seen it
directed towards her, as she sate crying under the weeping ash.







Moreover, very much of the discomfort there arose from "mere manner,"
as people express it, which is always indescribable and indefinable.







Osborne had been able to have more out-of-door amusements it would
have been better; but he was short-sighted, and cared little for the
carefully observant pursuits of his brother; he knew but few young
men of his own standing in the county; his hunting even, of which he
was passionately fond, had been curtailed this season, as his father
had disposed of one of the two hunters he had been hitherto allowed.







Catholic wife—and a wife who might be said to have been in service!







Miss Rose was generally very busy just before Easter in Hollingford.







Kirkpatrick would be offended, if she sent her a new breadth for her
lilac silk-gown, in place of one that had been spoilt by Mrs.







Cynthia was raw; now, Cynthia's face lighted up with spirit, and her
whole body showed her ill-repressed agitation, but she only said a
few sharp words, expressive of anything but kindly feeling towards
the gentleman, and then bade Molly never name his name to her again.







Cynthia or Molly could speak, though he addressed his words to them.







Cynthia had much to tell him of the small proceedings since he went
away, or to relate the conclusions of half-accomplished projects.







Once again he had the same ill-luck, and then he received a little
pretty three-cornered note from Mrs.







Molly sate by, and wondered how it would all end, or, rather, how
soon it would all end, for she thought that no girl could resist such
reverent passion; and on Roger's side there could be no doubt—alas!







Squire did not know him personally, but from the agent's manner of
speaking, and the deference that was evidently paid to him, Mr.







One evening Roger, sitting by the languid, careless, dilettante
Osborne, began to question him as to the details of the marriage.







Cynthia had an old antipathy to the great family who had made so much
of her mother and so little of her; and whom she considered as in
some measure the cause why she had seen so little of her mother in
the days when the little girl had craved for love and found none.







But as Roger in his boyhood had loved Osborne too well to be jealous
of the praise and love which the eldest son, the beautiful brilliant
lad, had received, to the disparagement of his own plain awkwardness
and slowness, so now Osborne strove against any feeling of envy or
jealousy with all his might; but his efforts were conscious, Roger's
had been the simple consequence of affection, and the end to poor
Osborne was that he became moody and depressed in mind and body; but
both father and son concealed their feelings in Roger's presence.







Osborne's life is not so very secure; and then—what will Roger be?







Roger's visits, and the watching of his attentions to Cynthia.







Squire, the three women were alone in the drawing-room, for Mr.







I get quite enough of tears in the day, shed for real causes, not to
want them at home, where, I hope, they are shed for no cause at all.







Goldsmith when he
<span class="nowrap">wrote—</span></p>
<div class="center">
<table style="padding: 0px;margin: 0 auto;"><tbody><tr><td>
He threw off his friends like a huntsman his pack,<br>
For he knew when he liked he could whistle them back.







Gibson could, by any possibility, be so tiresome as she found them.







Perhaps Molly's state of delicate health, consequent upon her rapid
growth during the last few months, made her irritable; but really
often she had to get up and leave the room to calm herself down after
listening to a long series of words, more frequently plaintive or
discontented in tone than cheerful, and which at the end conveyed no
distinct impression of either the speaker's thought or feeling.







Girls at the age I was then are so terribly keen at scenting out
motives, and putting in their disagreeable questions as to the little
twistings and twirlings and vanishings of conversation; they've no
distinct notion of what are the truths and falsehoods of polite life.







Kirkpatrick's,—calculating the consequent inconveniences, and
weighing them against the probable advantages, even while she spoke.







There would be no break for six hours—no music, no reading; but the
two ladies would sit at their worsted work, pattering away at
small-talk, with not even the usual break of dinner; for, to suit the
requirements of those who were leaving, they had already dined early.







I think it's half fancy; but I should like your father to tell me so.







He will laugh at me, I daresay; but I don't think I shall mind that.







Ostler had snared, (I hope we shan't be taken up for poachers, Mr.







Henderson's mother has advised my aunt to consult a certain Dr.







Gibson to come and be told of the rumours affecting his daughter.







She's been carrying on a clandestine correspondence with Mr.







Miss Browning:</p>
<p>"What is all this I hear about my little friend Molly Gibson and Mr.







Cumnor had been in the habit of observing the revelations made by
other people's tones and voices, she would have found out that Mrs.







Molly" (as the girl entered the room, fresh from a morning's walk).







Too much, may be, for I showed him all my passions and ill-tempers!







But I'm sorry mamma still looks upon me as 'an encumbrance,' as the
advertisements in <i>The Times</i> always call us unfortunate children.







But he took a chair and placed it near her, opposite to the window.







Again in the evening he sought her out, but found her again
pre-occupied with one of the young men staying in the house, who had
had the advantage of two days of mutual interest, and acquaintance
with the daily events and jokes and anxieties of the family circle.







They will want me more than ever
<span class="nowrap">now—"</span></p>
<p>Again she felt herself touching on a sore subject, and stopped short.







England for a considerable time—if he followed her now to her own
home,—in the very drawing-room where he had once offered to Cynthia?







Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.







License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







Gutenberg™ License.







TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.







OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







Defect you cause.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.